Towards Automated Generation of
Smart Grid Cyber Range for Cybersecurity
Experiments and Training
Daisuke Mashima, Muhammad M. Roomi,
Bennet Ng, Zbigniew Kalbarczyk
Illinois at Singapore Pte Ltd
{daisuke.m,roomi.s,bennet.ng,kalbarcz }@adsc-create.edu.sgS.M. Suhail Hussain, Ee-chien Chang
National Cybersecurity R&D Lab
National University of Singapore
suhail@ieee.org, changec@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract —Assurance of cybersecurity is crucial to ensure
dependability and resilience of smart power grid systems. In
order to evaluate the impact of potential cyber attacks, to
assess deployability and effectiveness of cybersecurity measures,
and to enable hands-on exercise and training of personals, an
interactive, virtual environment that emulates the behaviour of
a smart grid system, namely smart grid cyber range, has been
demanded by industry players as well as academia. A smart
grid cyber range is typically implemented as a combination of
cyber system emulation, which allows interactivity, and physical
system (i.e., power grid) simulation that are tightly coupled for
consistent cyber and physical behaviours. However, its design
and implementation require intensive expertise and efforts in
cyber and physical aspects of smart power systems as well
as software/system engineering. While many industry players,
including power grid operators, device vendors, research and
education sectors are interested, availability of the smart grid
cyber range is limited to a small number of research labs.
To address this challenge, we have developed a framework
for modelling a smart grid cyber range using an XML-based
language, called SG-ML, and for “compiling” the model into
an operational cyber range with minimal engineering efforts.
The modelling language includes standardized schema from IEC
61850 and IEC 61131, which allows industry players to utilize
their existing configurations. The SG-ML framework aims at
making a smart grid cyber range available to broader user bases
to facilitate cybersecurity R&D and hands-on exercises.
Index Terms —Smart grid, cyber range, testbed, IEC 61850,
cybersecurity
I. I NTRODUCTION
Emerging cyber threats against smart grid systems is one of
the biggest concerns for ensuring dependable and trustworthy
operation of our nations’ critical infrastructure. In the last
decades, we have witnessed a number of real-world incidents,
such as Stuxnet attack in 2010 [1], Ukraine power plant
attacks in 2015 and 2016 [2], hacking against the US utility’s
control room in 2018, Venezuela blackout caused by cyber
attacks in 2019 [3], ransomware attack against K-Electric in
Pakistan [4]. In order to counter and respond to such incidents,
it is imperative to intensively evaluate the impact of various
attack vectors, robustness of the system against these vectors,
and to design response and recovery procedures.While it would be ideal to conduct such exercises and
evaluations in the real system environment, it is impossible
to avoid any potential impact on the availability and stability
of the power grid operation. An alternate solution is to develop
an isolated testbed using the same hardware as the real
system, e.g., Electric Power and Intelligent Control (EPIC)
testbed [5]. However, such a hardware-based approach has
inherent limitation in initial and operational cost, reconfigura-
bility, scalability, and accessibility. Setting up and maintaining
such a testbed is rather costly and hence may not be feasible
for most organizations. Moreover, the system configuration
and topology are fixed and difficult to modify or extend.
In addition to these challenges, even in such an isolated
testbed, experiments with high risk are often not permitted.
For example, it would never be allowed to do the experiments
similar to Aurora generator test done by Idaho National Lab
researchers to demonstrate that cyber-originated attacks could
physically destroy generators [6].
Due to these reasons, high-fidelity, virtual environment for
conducting interactive cybersecurity experiments and exer-
cises, often called cyber range, has attracted interest from both
industry and academia. Smart grid cyber range is a virtual
system that emulates cyber and physical systems of a smart
grid, and can interact with human users in a real-time manner
for conducting various experiments. Numerous efforts have
been made to develop cyber range for smart grid systems in
the recent years. Numerous efforts have been made to develop
a cyber range for smart grid systems in recent years. Some of
the efforts, such as [7], have limitations in terms of fidelity
while others are designed to emulate one specific system or
designed in one-off, in-house manner [8]–[15], resulting in
very limited accessibility.
To address these challenges and facilitate industry players
and academic researchers to have their own cyber range
on premise, we have developed a framework for automated
smart grid cyber range generation, called SG-ML (Smart
Grid Modelling Language) [16]. SG-ML defines XML-based
modelling language for defining configurations of smart grid
cyber range and provides the toolchain, SG-ML Processor , for
parsing the models and, like a compiler, instantiating a cyber
1arXiv:2404.00869v1  [cs.CR]  1 Apr 2024range according to the configuration. This paper focuses on
the description of the SG-ML Processor toolchain. SG-ML is
defined by using standardized models, such as IEC 61850 SCL
(System Configuration description Language) [17], [18] that
power grid operators already have. Thus users in the power
grid industry can utilize their existing assets to generate a
digital replica of their smart grid, which can be, for instance,
utilized for a red-team exercise to identify vulnerabilities
without affecting the production system. Moreover, the XML-
based model can be shared and customized in the open-source
community. As a result, even users in other sectors can develop
their own cyber range or reproduce it with minimal power grid
expertise and engineering efforts.1
Different types of smart grid security testbeds (physical,
hybrid and virtual) are developed over the years for research,
training and experiment applications [7], [15], [19]–[23].
Although these testbeds have different advantages and are
utilized for different applications, limitations are found in
one or multiple of deployability, configurability, scalability,
and reproducibility. In particular, none of the existing efforts
considers automated generation of smart grid cyber range to
minimize user’s burden on designing and implementing the
system. To our knowledge, the SG-ML framework we have
developed is the first to largely automate the generation of
smart grid cyber range based on user-defined models.
Automated generation of cyber range from user-defined,
standard-based models benefit industry players and practition-
ers in multiple ways. First, by generating a replica of the smart
grid infrastructure, it can be utilized to assess potential vulner-
abilities through extensive red-team testing without affecting
the real system. Besides cybersecurity, such a cyber range
can be utilized to evaluate compatibility and correctness of
the power grid configuration (e.g., consistency among IED’s
(intelligent electronic devices) protection functions and PLC
(programmable logic controllers) logics). Cyber range can
also be used to conduct hardware-in-the-loop testing of PLCs
and IEDs before deployment. Last but not the least, cyber
range can be valuable resource for the cybersecurity hands-on
training and education for technicians.
II. S MART GRIDCYBER RANGE ARCHITECTURE
We first summarize the components that are involved in a
typical smart grid cyber range found in the literature, which is
to be modelled and generated by the SG-ML framework. The
high-level architecture is shown in Figure 1.
Typically, cyber range for cyber-physical systems is imple-
mented as a combination of cyber system emulation and a
physical plant simulation. In a smart grid cyber range for a
flexible and interactive cyber attack experiments, the cyber
side of the system should be implemented with a virtual
network running a number of (virtual) smart grid devices,
namely SCADA HMI (supervisory control and data acquisition
human-machine interface), PLCs , and IEDs . SCADA HMI
1SG-ML framework is open-sourced, along with the specification document
and demo videos, at https://github.com/smartgridadsc/CyberRangeis a user interface for human operators to see the status of
the power grid system and, when necessary, sends control
commands to the plant. IEDs work as sensors and actuators
to collect power grid measurements (e.g., power, voltage,
frequency, etc.) and operate on the physical devices, such as
circuit breakers (CBs) and transformers. IEDs also implement
protection function (e.g., over current / voltage protection) to
protect the physical equipment from damage. IEDs commu-
nicate with other IEDs, PLCs, and/or SCADA HMI, using
standard communication protocols, such as IEC 61850 [17].
PLCs are often utilized in smart grid system to implement
automated control. PLCs collect measurements from one or
multiple IEDs and then execute pre-configured control logic
based on those inputs and sends control commands to IEDs.
Control logic for the PLC is often programmed according to
IEC 61131 standard [24].
The aforementioned cyber-side components interact with
the power system simulator in real-time. For instance, when
a virtual IED receives a control command to open a circuit
breaker, it should take effect on the power flow status shortly
after the receipt. The near-realtime interface between the cyber
side and physical side can be implemented in multiple ways.
Some commercial power system simulators have interactive
API, and thus it can be utilized when the emulated virtual
IEDs receives control commands. Alternatively, database or
networking can be utilized. A cyber range discussed in [14]
utilizes database as the bi-directional (read/write) interface,
and [15] utilizes publisher-subscriber communication to in-
teract with the power system simulator. As the cyber range
is mainly intended for interactive cyber attack exercise and
experiments, all of these options are regarded sufficient in
practice. Besides, power system simulation models can be
configured according to some scenarios, such as contingency,
disruptions, as well as abnormal load profiles.
III. A UTOMATED SMART GRIDCYBER RANGE
GENERATION FRAMEWORK
The automated smart grid cyber range generation framework
utilizes the XML-based modelling schema proposed by us,
called SG-ML [16]. SG-ML is used to define cyber and
physical configuration of smart grid cyber range, and the set
of XML files are used as the input for the SG-ML Processor.
SG-ML Processor processes the model files and generate an
operational cyber range (Figure 2).
Fig. 1. Typical Architecture of Smart Grid Cyber Range
2Fig. 2. Overview of SG-ML Framework
TABLE I
TYPES OF IEC 61850 SCL (S YSTEM CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
LANGUAGE ) FILES AND DESCRIPTION
Type of SCL File Description
SSD (System
Specification
Description)Contains the overview of the substation structure
as a single line diagram, voltage levels, bay levels,
and functions of the substation.
SCD (System Con-
figuration Descrip-
tion)Contains complete description of the process in-
cluding configuration for all IEDs present in a
substation, structure or layout of the substation and
a communication configuration section.
ICD (IED Capabil-
ity Description)Contains an overview of functionalities and engi-
neering capabilities of an IED. It also contains the
logical nodes (LNs) and the corresponding data
types associated with the IED capability.
SED (System
Exchange
Description)Contains information about the electrical connec-
tion between the two substations and the communi-
cation network information, and semantics of IEDs
involved in inter-substation communication.
A. SG-ML Specification
SG-ML is the modelling language for configuring smart grid
cyber range and is defined as a set of XML schemas. Thus, the
SG-ML model is both human and machine friendly. In other
words, SG-ML models can be processed by software while
human users can also write and modify them. We have decided
to utilize standardized models used in the power grid sector,
namely IEC 61850 SCL (System Configuration description
Language) and IEC 61131-3 PLCopen XML, as well as the
supplementary XML schema defined by us. IEC 61850 SCL
schema is used in different kinds of configuration files for
the IEC 61850 compliant substation systems (Table I). This
design choice allows power grid operators to recycle their
own IEC 61850 SCL files corresponding to their own systems
to generate a virtual replica for experiments and exercises.
While we admit that preparing IEC 61850 SCL files from
scratch is not trivial for users from other domains, this can be
overcome by sharing a wide range of examples, including ones
contributed by power grid experts, in a public repository. Since
SCL files are well-structured XML files and well documented,
customization of such template is not difficult. Moreover,
such templates allows users to reproduce the same virtual
environment for experiments, benchmarking and so forth.
Based on our study, most of the static configuration of the
smart grid can be derived from SCL files. For instance, an
SSD file can be used to generate power flow simulation model
while an SCD file can be used for cyber network topology to
be emulated. An ICD file contains necessary information todefine functionality of virtual smart grid devices, namely IEDs.
An SED file defines cyber and physical connectivity between
substations, and thus can be used to generate multi-substation
topology. SG-ML framework can, in an unified way, support
modelling and instantiation of various smart grid systems that
differ in terms of the number of substations and the number
of devices and topology involved in each substation.
PLCs are the crucial component for automated control in
industrial control systems, and they are often used in smart
power grid systems. PLCs read measurements from power
grid and then execute pre-configured control logic to initiate
actuation. Such configuration are defined in IEC 61131-3
PLCopen XML [24], which expresses the control logic and
variable definitions.
While the standardized models provide us with useful infor-
mation for characterizing a cyber range, they are not sufficient.
For instance, dynamic behaviour of the system, e.g., load
profile and disturbance scenarios, cannot be configured in the
SCL files. Thus, we have defined supplementary XML schema
(Power System Extra Config XML) . Besides, parameters for
IEDs’ protection functions (described in Table II), such as
alarm and trip thresholds, and the mapping between the cyber-
side devices and physical-side device or information (e.g.,
which IED is measuring or controlling which transmission
lines) are not included in the SCL files. Thus, we defined
IED Config XML to incorporate the missing parameters. In
addition, data sources and data points for SCADA HMI are not
part of the SCL files. Hence, these can be defined in another
supplementary XML schema SCADA Config XML . In order
to ensure user-friendliness, supplementary XML schemas are
defined in a simple, straightforward format [16]. Usage of the
supplementary XML files will be illustrated in Figure 3.
B. SG-ML Processor
SG-ML Processor is a toolchain to parse SG-ML files that
are used to generate cyber and physical model to be emulated
in the cyber range. The components of the SG-ML Processor
is illustrated in Figure 2 (the middle section).
Generation of Power System Simulation Model: An IEC
61850 SSD file contains information such as a single-line
diagram of the power grid topology in a substation. Thus, SG-
ML parses the SSD file and then generates a power system
simulation model. In the current version, SG-ML Processor
generates a simulation model for Pandapower [25], an open-
source power system simulator. While an SSD file only con-
tains topology in a single substation, it is often desired to simu-
late a larger system model consisting of multiple-substations.
In such a case, IEC 61850 SED files, along with SSD files
of the substations, are used. Typically, an SED file contains
connectivity between a pair of substations. Our toolchain first
combines multiple SSD files into a consolidated SSD file
based on the connectivity derived from SED files. Then the
consolidated SSD file is processed using the same tool to
generate a multi-substation power grid physical model (see
also Table I). In order to run the power system simulation for
the cyber range, we further need to provide information such
3TABLE II
PROTECTION FUNCTIONS ON VIRTUAL IED
IEC 61850 Standard
Logical Node NameDescription Thresholds in IED Config XML File
PTOC (Time Over-current
protection)Opens a circuit breaker when the amount of power flow exceeds the threshold. Threshold limit for current, generally 3 to 4
times the nominal current
PTOV (Over-voltage pro-
tection)Opens a circuit breaker when the voltage on a bus exceeds the threshold Threshold limit on bus voltage
PTUV (Under-voltage
protection)Opens a circuit breaker when the voltage on a bus goes below the threshold Lower limit of bus voltage
PDIF (Differential Protec-
tion)Opens a circuit breaker when the current measurements at the 2 connected
substations are different beyond the thresholdThreshold limit for differential current be-
tween two substations
CILO (Interlocking) Prevents a circuit breaker to be closed when a certain circuit breaker is open -
as load profile and simulation scenarios. Simulation scenarios
include disturbance and contingency, such as generator loss,
line loss, etc. In order to incorporate these, the Power System
Config Extra XML file is used. The XML file specifies the
amount of load and circuit breaker status in a time series for
each component in the simulation model. The power system
simulator in the cyber range reads these parameters at each
step of the simulation.
Generation of Cyber Network Emulation Model: For each
substation, cyber network model can be derived from IEC
61850 SCD file. An SCD file contains network addresses
(including IP address and MAC address) of nodes, and
connectivity between nodes (e.g., node-switch, switch-switch
connections, etc.). These parameters are used to configure the
network emulator. In the current version, we use Mininet [26]
for the cyber network emulation. Similar to SSD files, each
SCD file contains information about a single substation. Thus,
to produce multi-substation cyber network model, we need
to combine multiple SCD files. Typically, substations are
connected through wide area network (WAN). The toolchain
of the current version simplifies the emulation of WAN, and
it is abstracted as a single switch connected to all substations.
Virtual IED Configuration: Virtual IEDs are implemented
as an application written in C language using libiec61850
library [27]. A virtual IED implements communication us-
ing IEC 61850 protocols, including MMS (Manufacturing
Message Specification), GOOSE (Generic Object Oriented
Substation Event), R-GOOSE (Routable GOOSE) and R-SV
(Routable Sampled Value). IEC 61850 MMS is utilized for
communication between SCADA HMI and IEDs and PLCs
and IEDs for conveying interrogation and control commands.
GOOSE and R-GOOSE are utilized among IEDs to exchange
device status information, while R-SV is used for sending
power grid measurements among IEDs. Virtual IEDs also
implements popular protection functions, which are listed in
Table II. Each virtual IED is instantiated by an IEC 61850
ICD file by enabling features defined in it. For instance, if
the ICD file contains definition of logical node PTOV , over-
voltage protection function is enabled. Moreover, if inter-
substation protection function (logical node CILO) is defined
in the ICD file, communication module for R-GOOSE and
R-SV protocols are enabled. However, an ICD file alone is
not sufficient because actual threshold for each protectionfunction is not specified in the ICD file. Thus, to provide
supplementary information, we have introduced IED Config
XML. Virtual IEDs are connected to the power system simu-
lator through an open-sourced MySQL database. This works
as a “cache” storing a set of key-value pairs, for reading
power grid measurements (voltages, power flow, etc.) and
executing control (e.g., opening/closing circuit breakers). As it
is necessary for each virtual IED to know the mapping between
the naming of data item in the ICD file and the power system
simulation output, such information is also part of self-defined
IED Config XML [16].
Virtual PLC Configuration: Our cyber range uses an open-
source PLC software, namely OpenPLC61850 [31], for emu-
lating a PLC. OpenPLC61850 supports Modbus communica-
tion protocol (for interacting with SCADA) and IEC 61850
MMS protocol towards IEDs. OpenPLC61850 requires a set
of ICD files corresponding to the IEDs that it interacts with,
as well as an IEC 61131-3 PLCopen XML file that contains
control logic. According to the configuration found in the SCD
file explained earlier, OpenPLC61850 is started on nodes that
run PLCs.
Virtual SCADA Configuration: A SCADA system offers an
user-interface for a human user to monitor the system status
and trigger manual control on a physical plant. Our cyber range
utilizes an open-source software, called SCADABR [30]. The
settings on data source (e.g., PLCs) and data points has to be
configured in SCADABR according to the user-defined model.
We have implemented a script to translate the SCADA Config
XML into a JSON format that SCADABR can import.
The overall procedure of SG-ML Processor and the place-
ment of each module (green rectangular) are found in Figure 3.
C. Limitation
A cyber range generated by SG-ML relies on open-source
tools for the sake of broader accessibility. One limitation
caused by this decision is that the power system simulation is
not completely real-time or capable of simulating dynamics.
Pandapower [25] simulator we employed is a steady-state
power flow simulation software, and it is a one-time solver that
provides a snapshot of power grid status. Therefore, our cyber
range runs it periodically (e.g., every 100ms) with the updated
configuration and load profile. This implies that change of
power grid status happens with this time granularity in a
discrete manner. On the other hand, cyber range is intended
4Module Name Description
SSD Merger For multi-substation model, combine
multiple SSD files into a consolidated
SSD file
SCD Merger For multi-substation model, combine
multiple SCD files into a consolidated
SCD file
SSD Parser Generate power system simulation
model from SSD
Mininet Launcher Generate cyber topology from SCD and
start virtual network
Virtual IED Builder Configure and compile virtual IED in-
stance based on ICD
OpenPLC Editor /
OpenPLC61850Open-source PLC runtime and configu-
ration tool [28], [29]
SCADA Config
ParserParse SCADA Config XML to gen-
erate JSON that can be imported to
SCADABR
SCADABR Open-source SCADA HMI for monitor-
ing power grid status [30]
Fig. 3. SG-ML Processor Toolchain Flowchart and Module Description
for human-interactive cyber attack exercise and experiments,
and SCADA HMI and PLCs are collecting data usually with
second-level granularity. Thus, the time granularity and real-
timeness of this degree are still acceptable in practice.
IV. D EMONSTRATION OF SG-ML AND CYBER RANGE
A. Generation of EPIC Testbed Cyber Range
EPIC [5], [32] is a state-of-the-art smart grid security
testbed hosted by Singapore University of Technology and
Design. This testbed is utilized for research and training to
design a safe and secure critical infrastructure. Therefore, we
consider EPIC testbed for our demonstration. The topology
and configuration are available at [5], [32]. EPIC testbed
consists of 4 segments, namely generation, transmission, mi-
crogrid, and smart homes. The power generation is performed
through two generators (in generation segment) and PV and
batteries (in microgrid segment). This combined generation
reflects the modern-day power grid with conventional power
sources and renewable energy sources (RES). The smart
homes consist of controllable loads. Each of these segments
include multiple IEDs connected the power grid devices and is
monitored by a SCADA HMI. While the original EPIC testbed
includes multiple PLCs, in the cyber range we consider one
PLC that mediates communication between SCADA HMI and
IEDs (called CPLC). In the real power grid, these segments
belong to different substations. However, following the EPIC
testbed setting, we consider all belong to a single substation.
The SCL files can be generated with any tool or can be
obtained from the real system or an open-source community.
Our toolchain conducts the preparation tasks in a largely
automated manner, such as generation of the power system
simulation model, cyber network emulation model, and/or
virtual IED, PLC, and SCADA HMI instances (Figure 3).
The cyber topology of the EPIC testbed model is shown
in Figure 4. The scripts in our toolchain parse an SCD file
(consolidated SCD, in case of multi-substation model) and
then extract necessary information into an intermediate JSON
file, which is then passed to the script to configure and start theMininet emulator. The same script also launches virtual IED
executables on the specified virtual nodes on the Mininet.
After the Mininet emulator is started, the virtual PLC and
a SCADA HMI is started on the respective virtual node
on Mininet. As open-source tools (OpenPLC61850 [31] and
SCADABR [30]) are used, the starting process has to be done
manually. The user can access the command-line terminal
and/or web interface of the corresponding virtual node and
then start the necessary program. PLC logic in Structured
Text format can be uploaded to the OpenPLC runtime and
then started. The main responsibility of CPLC in the EPIC
testbed is to mediate the communication between IEDs and
SCADA HMI. Therefore, we also configured the virtual PLC
accordingly. Note that OpenPLC61850 also requires ICD files
of IEDs that the PLC interacts with. Regarding SCADABR,
after starting up, the user can upload the SCADABR Config
JSON data that defines data sources and data points.
After confirming the communication among the virtual
devices, we can start the power flow simulator. We utilize Pan-
dapower simulator, and the topology is automatically defined
according to the SSD file. Our script generates the topology by
parsing the SSD file, and then, by using the information from
the configuration file, a sequence of power system simulation
models is created (Figure 5). The models in the sequence are
executed at a designated time slot (e.g., 100ms interval).
Our toolchain can support smart grid system including
multiple substations, beyond the scale of the EPIC model.
Cyber and physical connectivity among substations and com-
munication models are defined by using IEC 61850 SED files
(see Table I). Based on our experiments, a commodity desktop
PC with Intel Core i9 Processor and 16GB RAM can host a
5-substation model including 104 virtual IEDs with 100ms
power flow simulation interval. It is also possible to define a
cyber range spanning over multiple nodes to scale up further.
B. Cyber Attack Case Studies
As the main purpose of a cyber range is to conduct
interactive cyber attack experiments and exercises, in this
5Fig. 4. Generated Cyber Network Topology on Mininet (EPIC Model) generated using
ONOS [33]. Rounded rectangles show mapping to the EPIC testbed.
Fig. 5. Generated Power System Topology on Pandapower (EPIC
Model). Rounded rectangles show mapping to the EPIC testbed.
section we discuss how the cyber attack case studies can be
conducted on the cyber range. Owing to the limitation of
space, we leave the demonstration to the demo video found at
https://github.com/smartgridadsc/CyberRange.
Among a wide range of attack vectors, we focus on false
command injection and man-in-the-middle attacks. The former
can cause direct and immediate impact on power grid stability
as demonstrated in the 2015 Ukraine incident [34], and the
latter is a versatile building block for mounting a wide range
of attacks, such as false data injection and alarm suppression.
We note that attacks that can be experimented are not limited
to these two. Users can utilize any penetration testing tool like
Nmap and Metasploit on a virtual node of the cyber range or
on their own devices connected to the cyber range.
False Command Injection (FCI) Attack: Assuming that
the attacker has compromised one of the nodes in the system
and run malwares like CrashOverride [35] to transmit fake
IEC 61850 MMS commands. Attack of this sort can be
experimented by running an IEC 61850 MMS client (e.g.,
IEC61850bean [36]) on a node in the cyber range to emit
standard-compliant command messages. Once the IED re-
ceives a circuit breaker (CB) open command, for instance,
the corresponding CB is operated, and the power flow change
is calculated by the power flow simulator.
Man-in-the-middle (MITM) Attack: Typically man-in-the-
middle (MITM) attack is mounted by using a strategy called
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol) spoofing. This confuses
the mapping between a device’s logical (IP) address and
physical address. Using ARP spoofing, an attacker can mislead
the traffic to itself for interception and manipulation. As a
consequence, the attacker could possibly mislead the SCADA
HMI or the PLC to confuse the plant control (Figure 6).
Fig. 6. MITM Attack on a Power Grid Measurement
V. C ONCLUSIONS
We introduced a novel framework for modelling and auto-
mated generation of smart grid cyber range, called SG-ML.
SG-ML framework makes a smart grid cyber range accessible
to broader user base, including power grid industry, smart grid
device vendors, education sectors, and academia. In particular,
power grid operators can use our tool to generate a virtual
replica of the real infrastructure to conduct intensive red-team
testing, validation of configurations, compatibility testing, and
so forth. We have open-sourced the tool along with example
models for getting real-world feedback for future enhance-
ment. Enhancement of flexibility by using other virtualization
technologies, such as Docker, is part of our future work. We
also plan to develop a cloud-based cyber range service based
on our framework for enhanced accessibility and scalability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported in part by the National Research
Foundation, Singapore, Singapore University of Technology
and Design under its National Satellite of Excellence in
Design Science and Technology for Secure Critical Infras-
tructure Grant (NSoE DeST-SCI2019-0005), and in part by
the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office,
Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and
Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme.
6REFERENCES
[1] R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon,” IEEE Security
& Privacy , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 49–51, 2011.
[2] D. U. Case, “Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian power grid,”
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) , vol. 388,
pp. 1–29, 2016.
[3] “Venezuela’s maduro: Blackout due to cyber-attack, infiltrators,”
[Online]. Available at https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/3/10/
venezuelas-maduro-blackout-due-to-cyber-attack-infiltrators.
[4] “Hackers leak files stolen in pakistan’s k-electric ransomware attack,”
[Online]. Available at https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/
hackers-leak-files-stolen-in-pakistans-k-electric-ransomware-attack/.
[5] iTrust, Available at https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/
electric-power-intelligent-control-epic/.
[6] J. Weiss, “Aurora generator test,” Handbook of SCADA/Control Systems
Security , vol. 107, 2016.
[7] P. Gunathilaka, D. Mashima, and B. Chen, “Softgrid: A software-based
smart grid testbed for evaluating substation cybersecurity solutions,”
inProceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems
Security and Privacy , ser. CPS-SPC ’16. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, p. 113–124.
[8] M. Annor-Asante and B. Pranggono, “Development of smart grid testbed
with low-cost hardware and software for cybersecurity research and
education,” Wireless Pers Commun , vol. 101, p. 1357–1377, 2018.
[9] M. Mallouhi, Y . Al-Nashif, D. Cox, T. Chadaga, and S. Hariri, “A testbed
for analyzing security of scada control systems (tasscs),” in ISGT 2011 ,
2011, pp. 1–7.
[10] E. Hammad, M. Ezeme, and A. Farraj, “Implementation and develop-
ment of an offline co-simulation testbed for studies of power systems
cyber security and control verification,” International Journal of Elec-
trical Power & Energy Systems , vol. 104, pp. 817–826, 2019.
[11] R. Liu, C. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, T. T. Gamage, and A. K. Srivastava,
“Analyzing the cyber-physical impact of cyber events on the power grid,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2444–2453, 2015.
[12] G. Elbez, H. B. Keller, and V . Hagenmeyer, “A Cost-efficient Software
Testbed for Cyber-Physical Security in IEC 61850-based Substations,”
inIEEE International Conference on Communications, Control, and
Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm) , 2018.
[13] D. Mashima, D. Kok, W. Lin, M. Hazwan, and A. Cheng, “On design
and enhancement of smart grid honeypot system for practical collection
of threat intelligence,” in 13th USENIX Workshop on Cyber Security
Experimentation and Test (CSET 20) , 2020.
[14] M. M. Roomi, P. P. Biswas, D. Mashima, Y . Fan, and E.-C. Chang,
“False data injection cyber range of modernized substation system,” in
2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications, Control, and
Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm) . IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–7.
[15] N. K. Kandasamy, S. Venugopalan, T. K. Wong, and L. J. Nicholas,
“Epictwin: an electric power digital twin for cyber security testing,
research and education,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04260 , 2021.
[16] M. M. Roomi, S. S. Hussain, D. Mashima, E.-C. Chang, and D. Nicol,
“SG-ML: SMART GRID CYBER RANGE MODELLING FRAME-
WORK SPECIFICATION (Version 0.9),” [Online]. Available at https:
//github.com/smartgridadsc/CyberRange.[17] R. E. Mackiewicz, “Overview of iec 61850 and benefits,” in 2006 IEEE
Power Engineering Society General Meeting . IEEE, 2006, pp. 8–pp.
[18] I. TC57, “Iec 61850: Communication networks and systems for power
utility automation,” International Electrotechnical Commission Std ,
vol. 53, p. 54, 2010.
[19] A. A. Smadi, B. T. Ajao, B. K. Johnson, H. Lei, Y . Chakhchoukh, and
Q. Abu Al-Haija, “A comprehensive survey on cyber-physical smart grid
testbed architectures: Requirements and challenges,” Electronics , vol. 10,
no. 9, p. 1043, 2021.
[20] I. N. Fovino, M. Masera, L. Guidi, and G. Carpi, “An experimental
platform for assessing scada vulnerabilities and countermeasures in
power plants,” in 3rd International Conference on Human System
Interaction . IEEE, 2010, pp. 679–686.
[21] K. Barnes and B. Johnson, “National scada test bed substation au-
tomation evaluation report,” Idaho National Lab.(INL), Idaho Falls, ID
(United States), Tech. Rep., 2009.
[22] M. McDonald, J. Mulder, B. Richardson, R. Cassidy, A. Chavez,
N. Pattengale, G. Pollock, J. Urrea, M. Schwartz, W. Atkins et al. ,
“Modeling and simulation for cyber-physical system security research,
development and applications,” Sandia National Laboratories, Tech.
Rep. Sandia Report SAND2010-0568 , 2010.
[23] M. M. Roomi, S. S. Hussain, D. Mashima, E.-C. Chang, and T. S.
Ustun, “Analysis of false data injection attacks against automated control
for parallel generators in iec 61850-based smart grid systems,” IEEE
Systems Journal , 2023.
[24] A. Otto and K. Hellmann, “Iec 61131: A general overview and emerging
trends,” IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 27–31,
2009.
[25] L. Thurner, A. Scheidler, F. Sch ¨afer, J.-H. Menke, J. Dollichon, F. Meier,
S. Meinecke, and M. Braun, “pandapower—an open-source python tool
for convenient modeling, analysis, and optimization of electric power
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 6510–
6521, 2018.
[26] “Mininet,” Available at http://mininet.org/.
[27] “Open source libraries for iec 61850 and iec 60870-5-101/104,” [On-
line]. Available at https://libiec61850.com/.
[28] “OPENPLC,” [Online]. Available at https://openplcproject.com/.
[29] “OpenPLC61850,” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
smartgridadsc/OpenPLC61850.
[30] “ScadaBR,” Available at https://www.scadabr.com.br/.
[31] M. M. Roomi, W. S. Ong, D. Mashima, and S. S. M. Hussain,
“OpenPLC61850: An IEC 61850 MMS compatible open source PLC
for smart grid research,” SoftwareX , vol. 17, p. 100917, 2022.
[32] A. Siddiqi, N. O. Tippenhauer, D. Mashima, and B. Chen, “On practical
threat scenario testing in an electric power ics testbed,” in Proceedings
of the 4th ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical System Security , 2018, pp.
15–21.
[33] “Open Network Operating System (ONOS),” [Online]. Available at
https://github.com/opennetworkinglab/onos.
[34] K. Zetter, “Inside the cunning, unprecedented hack of ukraine’s power
grid,” http://www.wired.com/2016/03/inside-cunning-unprecedented-
hack-ukraines-power-grid/, 2016.
[35] “Crashoverride malware,” [Online]. Available: https://www.us-cert.gov/
ncas/alerts/TA17-163A, (Date last accessed on Aug. 18, 2017).
[36] “Iec61850bean,” [Online]. Available: https://www.beanit.com/
iec-61850/, (Date last accessed on Nov. 28, 2022).
7