arXiv:2403.13453v1  [physics.hist-ph]  20 Mar 2024Memories of Abdus Salam and the early days of supersymmetry †
Peter West
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Woodstock R oad, Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK
Department of Mathematics, King’s College, London WC2R 2LS , UK
Abstract
I give an account of what it was like to be a PhD student of Abdus Salam and also
to take part during the early stages of the development of sup ersymmetry.
email: peter.west540@gmail.com
†Invited contribution to the second edition of The Supersymm etric World, The begin-
nings of the Theory ed. by M. Shifman, World Scientiﬁc.
1I thank Misha Shifman for the suggestion to write this articl e. Its purpose is not
to give an account of the life of Abdus Salam or a systematic ac count of the early years
of supersymmetry. Rather it is to give an impression of what i t was like to be a PhD
student of Abdus Salam and also to take part during the early s tages of the development
of supersymmetry.
After an enjoyable undergraduate degree at Imperial colleg e I was accepted for PhD
studies at Imperial in 1973 but who would be my supervisor was not speciﬁed. I had
a choice of two possible supervisors, Tom Kibble or Abdus Sal am, or Professor Kibble
and Professor Salam as us students referred to them. It was a m easure of the strength
of Imperial College in theoretical physics at that time that a student could have a choice
between two professors who had both already laid the corners tones of the standard model
and who had also made other very important contributions. Al though at that time there
was not much talk of the standard model, at least among us stud ents or in our lectures.
Professor Kibble was very friendly and polite but he was rath er reserved and did not say
anything he had not thought carefully about. Indeed he did no t say very much at all. His
deep understanding of physics was obvious during the lectur e course that he gave us.
In contrast Professor Salam was very lively, had charisma an d an enthusiasm for
physics but he also had a friendly disposition which made one feel at home, at least that
was the case for me. As he explained some point of physics he us ually had a faint playful
smile on his face and one could not help wanting to understand what he was saying and
join in. I got the sense that studying under Professor Salam w ould be very exciting and
one might ﬁnd results of interest. Being keen to make my way in theoretical physics I
choose Professor Salam despite the fact that I was warned tha t many PhD students of
Professor Salam did not prosper. Ali Chamseddine also began with Professor Salam at the
same time.
For my ﬁrst year I did not see much of Professor Salam as I was ta kingmy preparatory
courses, but once the summer came I had ﬁnished my courses and so I went to see Professor
Salam to ﬁnd out what I would work on. At that time Professor Sa lam had an oﬃce on the
ﬁfth ﬂoor of the physics building but later on he moved oﬃce to the newly built Huxley
Building. In the former oﬃce his door would be open but a large screen had been placed
near to the door which blocked the view of his desk where he wor ked. While in the latter
oﬃce the door would be only slightly ajar and it did not permit a view of this desk. A
knock at the door resulted in a soft voice beckoning you in.
To my surprise he asked me what I wanted to do. I said that the in ﬁnities in quantum
ﬁeld theory were very ugly and so I would like to work on genera l relativitywhich was more
aesthetically pleasing. Rather than explain the ﬂaws in thi s naive approach, he suggested
that there would not be so much to do in general relativity and that I might like to look
at his very recent paper with John Strathdee in which they had discovered superspace
and also super-Feynman rules [1]. With this he handed me the I CTP preprint with its
characteristic pale blue boarder. As he sometimes did on lat er occasions he did not say I
might like to look at this humble paper. I do not remember that he said much about the
paper but only that I should look at it. Professor Salam had pr eviously written papers
on constructing spacetimes from cosets, for example the one with Mack [2] on viewing
the conformal group from the viewpoint of a coset. As such it w as natural that he and
2Strathdee should construct superspace as the coset of the su per Poincar´ e group modulo the
Lorentz group. Within days I was captured by the ideas in this paper and began working
on inﬁnities in supersymmetric theories. From the perspect ive of today I realise that I had
been subject to his great charm and diplomacy, a skill which h e had used to such great
eﬀect all over the world.
Professor Salam was not often at Imperial as he spent most of h is time at the centre
he had created in Trieste. Little did I, as a student, know of t he many endeavours for the
good of science in the third world that he was undertaking. Us students never knew when
we would next see Professor Salam. He would come about once a m onth and the ﬁrst we
realised that he was in was that the door of his room was slight ly ajar as we came into
work. I would knock and he would welcome me in. Remarkably he w as usually sitting at
his desk studying some document by himself. He was always ver y cheerful, friendly and
seemed to have time to talk as if he had all the time in the world . Since he was away most
of the time we had no one to watch over us and as a result we did no t work very hard
unless we really thought something was going to work out in a v ery good way.
Supersymmetry had been discovered in 1971 in the very remark able paper of Golfand
and Liktman [3] and a non-linear realisation was later found by Volkov and Akulov [4].
These papers went essentially unnoticed even though the for mer paper did contain a four
dimensional model of supersymmetry. Supersymmetry also ap peared in the superstring
whose fermionic sector was found by Ramond [5] and the bosoni c sector in the later paper
of Neveu and Schwarz [6]. Hidden in these papers was the two di mensional supersymmetry
algebra and this was extracted by Gervais and Sakita [7]. Wes s and Zumino generalised
this algebra to four dimensions and constructed the invaria nt Wess-Zumino model [8].
Itwasonlywiththislastpaperthatafewphysiciststookani nterestinsupersymmetry.
They were located at a only a few institutions including CERN in Geneva, the Ecole
Normale Sup´ erieur in Paris, Karlsruhe and the two institut es to which Salam belonged,
namely Imperial College and the International Centre for Th eoretical Physics in Trieste.
Thus in 1973 there were only a few people working on supersymm etry. Being a student
of Salam I was one of them as were indeed a number of other young people who were the
PhD students of those few who thought that supersymmetry was of interest.
In trying to read the paper of Salam and Strathdee it quickly b ecame clear that
supersymmetry required very advanced manipulations in the matrix algebra associated
with fermions. There were no courses on supersymmetry in 197 3, at least not at Imperial
College,norwerethereanypaperswhereonecouldlookthis, andanumberofotherdiﬃcult
matters, up. Fortunately Professor Salam’s long term colla borator Bob Delbourgo had an
oﬃce nearby and he provided me with all the technical help I ne eded. He even had a
problem I might work on involving the calculation of supersp ace Feynman diagrams in
the Wess-Zumino model. Understandably he was unable to resi st the temptation do this
himself and in a matter of days he had found the result [9] befo re I had even begun to think
about the problem. Using the superspace Feynman rules he fou nd that the Wess-Zumino
model only needed a wavefunction renormalisation as had pre viously been found using the
component formalism by Wess and Zumino [8] and Iliopoulos an d Zumino [10].
At that time the big problem was to spontaneously break super symmetry and so
hopefully ﬁnd a realistic model of nature that was supersymm etric. Particles in a su-
3persymmetric theory had the same mass and although one could spontaneously break
supersymmetry at the classical level [11,12], the pattern o f masses this lead to was not
consistent with nature. Professor Salam thought that radia tive corrections would break
supersymmetry and lead to more promising results. Such corr ections had been used to
good eﬀect in a paper of Coleman and Weinberg [13] in the very d iﬀerent context, namely
scalar electrodynamics.
Professor Salam and his long term collaborator John Strathd ee, who was in Trieste,
produced aseries ofmodelsanditwasmyjob tocomputetheir o ne-loopeﬀectivepotentials
and see if supersymmetry was spontaneously broken and what p attern of masses they lead
to. The ﬁrst models did not work and as time went on the models b ecame more and more
complicated involving very many ﬁelds. If I had not complete ly ﬁnished computing with
a given model by the time I next meet with Professor Salam it wa s not a problem, there
was always a much better model to look at instead.
Eventually Bob Delbourgo and I looked at one of the proposed m odels that required
us to diagonalise a 26 by 26 matrix. After much work we did do th is but the entires were
not real numbers meaning that the minimum of the potential wh ich we had also given was
not actually a minimum. When I told Professor Salam about thi s result he was not at
all perturbed and quickly produced another model which he mu st have brought with him
from Trieste. Fearing the same fate for this model I suggeste d there was a problem with
the model to which Salam gave a quick reply. It was not clear wh o was giving the worst
argument. Shortly afterwards Salam spoke to Bob Delbourgo a nd ask him to tell me that
all was well.
Eventually I realised that if supersymmetry was preserved a t the classical level then
the eﬀective potential vanished in the most general N= 1 theory invariant under rigid
supersymmetry [14]. This meant that one could not spontaneo usly break supersymmetry
using perturbative quantum corrections, although one coul d still hope that it was sponta-
neously broken by non-perturbative corrections. The probl em of breaking supersymmetry
in a natural way is still largely unsolved. Unlike in most the ories the minimum of poten-
tials in supersymmetric theories do not generically ﬁx all t he values of the ﬁelds and so
there is a degeneracy. Since the quantum corrections to the p otential vanish if supersym-
metry was preserved this degeneracy was not determined by qu antum corrections. Thus
supersymmetric theories have moduli.
The result had another more favourable consequence, as was p ointed out by others
[15], namely that supersymmetry did solve the hierarchy pro blem, at least technically. In
a supersymmetric version of the standard model the Higgs mas s would not be swept up
to some large uniﬁed scale by quantum corrections as long as s upersymmetry was not
broken much above the weak scale. This in turn lead to the hope that supersymmetry
might be found at the LHC (Large Hadron Collider at CERN). My a rticle in this volume
gives a more complete account of these developments. As we no w know the LHC did not
ﬁnd supersymmetry, at least not so far. While the above argum ent was plausible there is
nothing wrong with supersymmetry being broken at a very high scale and the problem of
naturalness in the standard model is resolved in some other, as yet unknown, way. A more
general non-renormalisation theorem was later found by Gri saru, W. Siegel and M. Rocek
[16] using some reformulated superFeynman rules.
4In those days there was no internet and so no arXiv. Once a resu lt was written up the
paper was sent to the journal but it was usually a long time bef ore it would be published
even if the referees were favourable. To enable more speedy a ccess to the paper copies
of it, called preprints, were produced and these were sent ou t by mail to those institutes
whose members might be interested in it. Since there were not many people who were
working on supersymmetry this did not involve much eﬀort. Pe ople who had heard of the
result and who did not have access to the preprint would send a post card requesting a
copy which was then sent directly to them. Each week the prepr ints that had arrived at
Imperial would be placed on some racks in the corridor. Each p aper had a piece of paper
attached to it on which one could write ones name which result ed in it being passed to you
but only after the others who were higher up the list had read i t. The consequence was
that people working on supersymmetry were not always aware o f what every one else was
doing. One advantage was that people could pursue lines of in dependent research without
too much inﬂuence of what others were doing.
After three years I wrote up my results in a thesis and the time came for my PhD
examination. Professor Salam had enrolled Professor John T aylor from Cambridge Uni-
versity to be the external examiner. He was rather softly spo ken, very polite and had
found important results in how symmetries were realised in q uantum ﬁeld theory. They
assembled in Salam’soﬃce and I was called in. Professor Sala m indicated that John Taylor
should ask me some questions on my thesis which he then did, wh ereupon Professor Salam
began working at his desk on some no doubt important task. Thi s lasted half an hour
at most and then there was silence which Professor Salam even tually noticed. He turned
to me and said I should explain to Professor Taylor some resul ts on gauging the super
Poincar´ e group I had found with Ali Chamseddine. With this P rofessor Salam resumed
the study of the document he was reading and I began writing on the board. This lasted
at most twenty minutes whereupon silence returned which Pro fessor Salam again noticed.
At this point the exam was declared over and, after a glance be tween them, they told me
I had passed.
After theWess-Zumino paper anobviousproblem wastoﬁnda th eoryofgravitywhich
was supersymmetric, that is, a generalisation of Einstein’ s theory to contain spin two as
well as a spin three-halves particle. There was an attempt [1 7] to construct supergravity by
generalising the geometry of Einstein’s theory but it was no t clear how to do this. After
about two years the ﬁrst supergravity theory was found by Fer rara, Freedman and van
Nieuwenhuizen [18]. They used the low key, but very powerful Noether technique that had
been discussed in the context of gravity by others. The advan tage of this approach was
that it did not require any preconceived geometrical notion s, the disadvantage was that
it required a lot of diﬃcult algebra. Indeed they were only ab le to show that the super-
gravity theory they had found was invariant under supersymm etry by using a computer.
The problem was that the result could not be reproduced by oth ers. Deser and Zumino
then showed that the spin three-halves particle did, unlike in other theories, propagate
in a causal manner and they also discussed the theory from the viewpoint of ﬁrst order
formalism [19].
There then followed two papers coupling the new supergravit y theory to the matter
supermultiplet containing spin one and spin one half partic les [20]. The next paper on
5supergravity was the result of Ali Chamseddine and myself [2 1] which Salam had asked
me to explain to Professor Taylor. We had taken it into our hea ds to gauge the super
Poincar´ e group in the style of Yang and Mills. Of course even Einstein’s gravity is not a
Yang-Mills theory but we were students who did not know any be tter. After only a few
lines many of the features of the new supergravity theory eme rged. Indeed one could write
down an action which was just that found in the paper of Ferrar a, Freedman and van
Nieuwenhuizen. One great advantage was that one could prove using the usual algebraic
manipulations, and in a relatively few lines, that the super gravity action was invariant
underthesupersymmetrytransformations. Inthiswaythedi scoveryofsupergravitytheory
was completed and it was in this way that the all subsequent su pergravity theories were
shown to be invariant. Our approach had a signiﬁcant draw bac k, it required one to
adopt a condition that broke the gauge symmetry, but miracul ously once one took this
unconventional step everything worked very well and the des ired result emerged. Professor
Kibble suggested in his understated way that we should under stand this step better. Our
proof of the invariance of the action was further elucidated in a paper by Paul Townsend
and van Niewenhuizen [22].
Of course we had also derived Einstein gravity as a gauge theo ry of the Poincar´ e
group. The gauging technique was used to ﬁnd the conformal su pergravity theories [23]
and higher spin theories emerge if one took a much bigger gaug e group. Ali Chamseddine
and myself also gauged the OSp(1,4) group and found the trans formations of the vierbein,
spin connection and gravitino. The results were reported in thesis of Ali Chamseddine [24].
An action was later found by MacDowel and Mansouri [25] which agreed with the then
known supergravity theory with a cosmological constant [26 ]. One problem was that our
paper was rejected by Nuclear Physics B and being students we did not know what to do
next. As a result it took quite some time to resubmit it after r emoving some of the ﬁbre
bundle language which really had no proper place in the paper . An account of previous
work on gauge symmetry and gravity by Sciama, Kibble, Trautm an and others and the
connection to our work is explained in detail in reference [2 7].
The time came to get a job. I applied to the research council of the UK for a post
doctoral fellowship. The resulting interview did not go wel l. The panel did not think much
of the new fangled idea of supersymmetry and wanted to know ho w it would aﬀect current
particle physics experiments. I, nor anyone else, had any re al idea of what was the answer
to this question and I did not get a fellowship. The Royal Soci ety did oﬀer me a fellowship
to take to the Ecole Normale Superieur. No doubt I had Salam an d others at Imperial to
thank for this. Most of the young people who worked on supersy mmetry had to wait a
long time to gain a permanent job although I had better luck.
There was another problem with the original supergravity th eory found by Ferrara,
Freedman and van Nieuwenhuizen. It had a supersymmetry alge bra which was tied to
the supergravity theory rather than being an independent al gebra. Until this point a
symmetry of a theory existed in a way that was dependent of tha t theory. In other words
the transformations formed a group which had an independent life. For example, the
Poincar´ e transformations exist independent of Maxwell’s theory and so can be used as a
guide to construct other Poincar´ e invariant theories. As s uch to construct the coupling
of super matter to the original supergravity was very diﬃcul t since this required a new
6supersymmetry algebra and this was only achieved for a few ve ry speciﬁc models [20,28].
What to do was not clear for about two years. The key step was th e observation that
the ﬁelds of a supergravity theory were in a one to one corresp ondence with the currents
in a supersymmetric theory and this had already been worked o ut by Ferrara and Zumino
[29]. This supermultiplet contained the energy momentum te nsor and the supercurrent but
there were other objects which had to correspond to addition al ﬁelds in the supergravity
theory. To ﬁnd the theory we used the same Noether procedure. It was a very long but
enjoyable calculation. The extension of the original super gravity theory which did have
a supersymmetry algebra that was independent of the supergr avity theory was found by
Kelly Stelle and myself [30] and independently by Ferrara an d van Nieuwenhuizen [31].
This theory had additional ﬁelds that did not lead to physica l degrees of freedom. It
was then possible to construct a tensor calculus for supergr avity [32] [33] and then it was
relatively easy to ﬁnd the most general coupling of matter to supergravity [34,35,36] which
played such a key role in the construction of realistic model s of supersymmetry using the
ideas of Chamseddine, Arnowitt and Nath [34, 37]. Other ways to ﬁnd the most general
coupling of matter to supergravity have proliferated but th ey perhaps lack the simplicity
and eﬃciency of the original approach.
Perhaps on the basis of these results Professor Salam invite d me to visit him in Trieste
for sometime. When I arrive at the centre in the morning I woul d ﬁnd Professor Salam
sitting at his desk studying what I thought were the latest pa pers. Talking to Professor
Salam you could not escape his great enthusiasm for physics; you came to understand that
it was a lot of fun to do physics and that it was good to work in a v ery relaxed and free
thinking way. Once we began our discussion he would think of a vast number of ways to
proceed in the quest to ﬁnd new things. He was always most inte rested in very new ideas
and while not all of his ideas worked they included many of the deepest ideas that have
come to dominate the subject. As one of his students I was, per haps, able to absorb some
of these qualities. Certainly, it was due to him that I began w orking on supersymmetry
rather than on some uninteresting direction.
At the end of my visit to Trieste the time came for me to leave fo r the airport. Salam
realised that I would be travelling at the same time as the Ita lian Minister for Science, who
was visiting the centre, and so he suggested we could share th e same car to the airport.
This was met with a frown by the organiser of the visit who, no d oubt correctly, thought
that a scruﬀy post-doc with a rucksack might dent the careful ly created image that the
centre wanted to portray. Salam’s suggestion was quietly sh elved and I went by train to
the airport.
I did not meet Julius Wess or Bruno Zumino during my doctorate studies but their
presence was always with me and, I suspect, the other young ph ysicists working on su-
persymmetry. Their results and the clarity of their papers w as a benchmark to which we
could but try to attain. When we did meet they were very friend ly and encouraging. One
aspect of there being so few working on supersymmetry was tha t there was a feeling of a
common purpose and being enguaged in an exciting endeavour. Of course supersymmetry
was great to work on. The calculations were usually diﬃcult b ut often worked out in a
spectacular manner and this encouraged us to continue despi te the lack of support from
the community at large.
7The superspace formulation of supergravity using geometri cal concepts analogous to
those used in Einstein’s theory was found by Wess and Zumino i n [38]. It turned out
that the curvatures and torsion were subject to very strong c onstraints which were allowed
by the fact that the tangent space group was only the Lorentz g roup under which they
formed a very reducible representation. We suspected that t hey had used the fact that it
must lead, when expressed in components, to above formulati on of supergravity to guide
them to this result. There then appeared a paper by Warren Sie gel claiming that their
constraints were so strong that there were no physical degre es of freedom left [39]. Wess
and Zumino explained that this paper was wrong but they had a w orried look. Of course
we found it very amusing that a young unknown, at least to us, p ost doc had dared to
contradict a paper of the gods. Eventually it was clear that t he paper of Warren Siegel
was indeed wrong but he then wrote a paper [40] solving the con straints on the torsions
and curvatures. A pedagogical and further elucidation of th is work was given in a paper
by Gates and Siegel [41]. It was a very considerable feat invo lving technical leaps of such
diﬃculty that I suspect few have worked through it.
The last time I meet Bruno Zumino was in the Newton Centre at th e University
of Cambridge in 1997. David Olive and I were puzzled by a point to do with a coset
construction and we discussed it with Bruno late in the after noon. It was not a crucial
point but it would have been good to understand it. The next da y when I arrive quite
early I found a hand written note on my desk from Bruno which ha d worked it all out in
great detail and in a very clearly way. David also found a note on his desk.
I end with an account of two meetings with Abdus Salam that dis play his warmth
and humanity.
I met Abdus Salam in his oﬃce in London a few days after he had wo n the Nobel
prize. I asked him what was it like to win such a prize, he reass ured me that he was just
the same. He then suggested that we go for coﬀee in the common r oom in the old physics
building at Imperial. To get there we had to go through a numbe r of doors and he insisted
that I go ﬁrst through each door despite my protests.
During thetimethatSalamwasveryilltherewasaconference inhishonour atTrieste,
but he was not well enough to go to all the talks. I saw him sitti ng at the very back of the
big auditorium. I asked if it would be alright to say hello, bu t I was told that he might
not recognise me. Since this might be the last time I would see him I went anyway. I said
hello, he put up his hand and I shook it. He then immediately sa id how was Sue. Sue is
my wife’s name who he had meet only once many years before.
Acknowledgements
I want to thank Misha Shifman for suggesting I write this arti cle. I also thank Ali
Chamseddine for comments.
References
[1] A. Salam and J. Strathdee, On Superﬁelds and Fermi-Bose Symmetry , Phys. Rev.
D11(1975) 1521.
[2] G. Mack and A. Salam, Finite-Component Field Representations of the Conformal
Group, Annals of Physics 53, (1969), 174-202.
8[3] Y.A. Golfand and E.S. Likhtman, Extension of the Algebra of Poincar´ e Group Gen-
erators and Violation of P Invariance ,JETP Lett. 13, 323 (1971).
[4] D.V. Volkov and V.P. Akulov, Possible universal neutrino interaction ,Pis’ma Zh.
Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 16, 621 (1972); Phys. Lett. 46B, 109 (1973).
[5] P. Ramond, Dual theory for free fermions , Phys. Rev. D3(1971) 2415.
[6] A. Neveu and J.H. Schwarz, Factorizable dual model of pions , Nucl. Phys. B31(1971)
86; A. Neveu and J.H. Schwarz, Quark Model of Dual Pions , Phys. Rev. D4(1971)
1109.
[7] J. L. Gervais and B. Sakita, Field Theory Interpretation Of Supergauges In Dual
Models, Nucl. Phys. B34(1971) 632.
[8] J. Wess and B. Zumino, Supergauge transformations in four dimensions , Nucl. Phys.
B70(1974) 139; A Lagrangian Model Invariant Under Supergauge T ransformations,
Phys. Lett. 49B(1974) 52.
[9] R. Delbourgo, Superﬁeld Perturbation Theory and Renormalization , Nuovo Cim. A
25(1975) 646.
[10] J. Iliopoulos and B. Zumino, Broken supergauge symmetry and renormalization , Nucl.
Phys. B76 (1974) 310.
[11] L.O’Raifeartaigh, Spontaneous Symmetry Breakingfor ChiralScalar Superﬁeld s,Nucl.
Phys.B96(1975) 331.
[12] P. Fayet, Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking Without Gauge Invaria nce, Phys.
Lett.58B(1975) 67.
[13] S. Coleman and E. Weinberg. Radiative Corrections as the Origin of Spontaneous
Symmetry Breaking , Physical Review D7(1973) 1888.
[14] P. West, Supersymmetric Eﬀective Potential , Nucl. Phys. B106(1976) 219.
[15] E. Witten, Dynamical Breaking of Supersymmetry , Nucl. Phys. B188(1981) 513.
[16] M Grisaru, W. Siegel and M. Rocek, Improved Methods for Supergraphs , Nucl.Phys.B
159(1979) 429,
[17] P. Nath and R. Arnowitt, Phys lett 56B(1975) 177, R. Arnowitt, P. Nath and B.
Zumino, Phys. Lett 56B, (1975) 81,
[18] D. Freedman, P. van Nieuwenhuizen and S. Ferrara, Progress toward a theory of su-
pergravity , Phys. Rev. D13, 3214 (1976); D. Freedman and P. van Nieuwenhuizen,
Properties of supergravity theory , Phys. Rev. D14, 912 (1976).
[19] S. Deser and B. Zumino, Consistent Supergravity ,Phys. Lett. 62B, 335 (1976).
[20] S. Ferrara, J. Scherk and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Locally Supersymmetric Maxwell-
Einstein Theory ,Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 1035 (1976); S. Ferrara, F. Gliozzi, J. Scherk
and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Matter Couplings in. Supergravity Theory ,Phys. Rev.
D15, 1013 (1977).
[21] A. Chamseddine and P. West, Supergravity as a gauge theory of supersymmetry ,Nucl.
Phys.B129, 39 (1977). This paper was received on the 28 September 1976 b ut was
initially rejected for publication. The revised version, r eceived on 10 June 1977, was
essentially the same except for two paragraphs explaining i n more detail its relation to
references [18] and [19]. It was also published as the Imperi al preprint ICTP/75/22,
September 1976.
9[22] P. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Geometrical interpretation of extended su-
pergravity ,Phys. Lett. B67, 439 (1977).
[23] P. Van Nieuwenhuizen, M. Kaku, and P. Townsend, Properties of conformal super-
gravity, Phys. Rev. D17, (1978) 1501.
[24] A. H. Chamseddine, Supersymmetry and higher spin ﬁelds , Ph.D. Thesis, defended
September 1976, ImperialCollege, LondonUniversity. Chap ter 6ofthethesisisstated
as collaborative work with P. West. The thesis can be found at
https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/0B8tITtoqQkxfeHQ3cFJ 0WUxIcHM/view?usp=sharing
[25] S. MacDowell and F. Mansouri, Uniﬁed geometric theory of gravity and supergravity ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 38(1977) 739. This paper was received on the 9 February 1977.
[26] Paul K. Townsend, Cosmological constant in supergravity , Phys. Rev. D15(1977)
2802.
[27] A. Chamseddine and P. West, The role of the 1.5 order formalism and the gauging of
spacetime groups in the development of gravityand supergra vitytheories ,Mod.Phys.Lett.
A 37(2022) 08, 2230005, arXiv:2201.06874.
[28] P.Breitenlohner, D.Z.Freedman, Supergravity with axial-gauge invariance ,Phys. Rev.
D15, 1173 (1977).
[29] S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Transformation properties of the supercurrent , Nuclear
PhysicsB87(1975) 207
[30] K. Stelle and P. West, Minimal auxiliary ﬁelds for supergravity ,Phys. Lett. B74,
569. 330 (1978).
[31] S. Ferrara and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, The auxiliary ﬁelds of supergravity , Phys.
Lett.B74, 333 (1978).
[32] K.S.StelleandP.West, Tensor calculus for the vector multiplet coupled to supergr avity,
Phys. Lett. 77B, 376 (1978); Relation between vector and scalar multiplets and gauge
invariance in supergravity , Nucl. Phys. B145(1978) 175.
[33] S. Ferrara and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Tensor calculus for supergravity , Phys. Lett.
76B(1978) 404;
[34]Structure of supergravity , Phys. Lett. 78B, 573 (1978). A. H. Chamseddine, R.
Arnowitt and P. Nath, Locally supersymmetric grand uniﬁcation , Phys. Rev. Lett.
49(1982) 970.
[35] E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello and A. Van Proeyen ,Coupling supersymmetric
Yang-Mills gauge theories to supergravity , Phys. Lett. 116B(1982) 231.
[36] P. Nath, R. Arnowitt and A. H. Chamseddine, Applied N=1 Supergravity, ICTP series
in Theoretical Physics, Volume 1, (1982), World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
[37] P. Nath, R. Arnowitt and A. H. Chamseddine, Gauge hieirarchy in supergravity in
supergravity Guts , Nucl. Phys. B227(1983) 121.
[38] J. Wess and B. Zumino, Superspace formulation of supergravity , Phys Lett 66B(1971)
361
[39 ] W. Siegel, it A Comment on the Wess-Zumino Formulation o f Supergravity 1977,
Harvard University preprint.
[40] W.Siegel, SolutiontoConstraintsinWess-ZuminoSupe rgravityFormalism,Nucl.Phys.
B142(1978)301-305; SupergravitySuperﬁelds Without a Supermetric ,Harvardpreprint
10HUTP-771 A068, Nucl. Phys. B142, 301 (1978);
[41] S.James Gates, Jr and W. Siegel, Understanding Constraints in Superspace Formula-
tions of Supergravity , Nucl.Phys. B163(1980) 519.
11