1 
 
 Optical Screening of Citrus Leaf Diseases Using  Label -Free 
Spectroscopic Tools: A Review  
Saurav Bharadwaj1,2, Akshita Midha2, Shikha Sharma3, Gurupkar Singh Sidhu4 and Rajesh Kumar2* 
1Agriculture & Water Technology Development Hub, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Punjab -140001, India.  
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar, Punjab -140001, India.  
3Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, CSK Himachal Pradesh Agricultural University, Palampur, 
Himachal Pradesh -176062, India.  
4School of Agricultural Biotechnology, College of Agriculture, Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana, Punjab 
141004, India.  
*email: rajeshkumar@iitrpr.ac.in  
Abstract  
Citrus diseases pose threats to citrus farming and result in economic losses  worldwide . Nucleic acid and serology -based 
methods of detection such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) , loop -mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), and 
immunochromatographic assays  are commonly used but these laboratory tests are laborious, expensive and might be 
subjected to cross -reaction and contamination. Modern optical spectroscopic techniques offer a promising alternative 
as they are label -free, sensitive, rapid, non -destructive, and demonstrate the potential for incorporation into an 
autonomous system for disease detection in citrus orchards. Nevertheless, the majority of optical spectroscopic methods 
for citrus disease detection are still in the trial phases and, require  additional efforts to be established as efficient and 
commercially viable methods. The review presents an overview of fundamental working principles, the state of the art, 
and explains the applications and limitations of the optical spectroscopy technique  including the spectroscopic imaging 
approach (hyperspectral imaging) in the identification  of diseases in citrus plant s grown over a large area . The review 
highlights (1) the technical specifications of optical spectroscopic tools that can potentially be utilized in field 
measurements, (2) their applications in screening citrus diseases through leaf spectroscopy, and (3) discusses their 
benefits an d limitations, including  future insights into label -free identification of citrus diseases. Moreover, t he role of 
artificial intelligence  is reviewed as potential effective tools for spectral analysis, enabling more accurate detection of 
infected citrus leaves even before the appearance of visual symptoms by leveraging compositional, morphological, and 
chemometric characteristics of the plant leaves . The review aims to encourage stakeholders to enhance the development 
and commercialization of field -based , label -free optical tools for the rapid and early -stage screening of citrus diseases 
in plants.  
Keywords : Citrus disease, Citrus greening, Fluorescence spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Hyperspectral imaging, 
Precision agriculture  2 
 
 1 Introduction  
Citrus plant s are evergreen trees and shrubs primarily grown in tropical and subtropical areas of Asia, Melanesia and 
Australia. Citrus fruits are rich in vitamins, minerals, dietary fibers, and phytochemicals, which are regularly consumed 
as part of a balanced diet an d offer numerous health benefits to combat multiple diseases in human. However, citrus 
diseases, broadly classified as fungal, viral and bacterial diseases, significantly impact citrus crops, leading to substanti al 
economic losses for citrus g rowers and consequently affecting the regional economies that depend on the citrus industry  
[1]. Alternaria brown spot in citrus  fruits and leaves  is a common disease caused by the airborne fungus Alternaria 
alternata . It develops foliar lesions on new tissues which eventually turns black spots into prominent yellow halos  [2]. 
Anthracnose is another fungal disease that affects leaves and results in the colonization of senescent tissues. The diseases 
grow on dead wood in the canopy and are spread by rain. The sexual spores are deposited on the young leaves and 
immature fruits th at lead to the germination of spores, forming a resting structure and remain dominant until an injury 
occurs  [3]. The greasy spots are wind -dispersed sexual spores produced during wet periods from the decomposition of 
fallen leaves [4]. The yellow spots can be found on the adaxial surface of the leaves. The abaxial surface exhibits brown 
blisters that eventually turn black due to the deposition of sexual spores  [5]. Citrus canker is caused by the Gram -
negative bacterium Xanthomonas axonopodis  when the bacteria enter the stomata on the leaves or other green parts of 
the plant (Fig. 1 a). The infected stems and fruits are spotted with water -soaked brown margins and yellow rings around 
the lesions  [6]. Xylella fastidiosa  causes citrus variegated chlorosis (CVC) in citrus plants . It damages the vascular 
system of plants. It shows yellow veins on the adaxial surface of leaves and indicates the deficiency of zinc in infected 
leaves [7]. Huanglongbing (HLB), also known as citrus greening, is another devastating bacterial disease widely 
considered a significant threat to citrus cultivation worldwide.  It is caused by the vector -transmitted pathogen 
Candidatus Liberibacter  and can be identified through symptoms such as yellowing and mottling of leaves, premature 
leaf shedding, deterioration of twigs and decay of roots and rootlets  [8] (Fig. 1b). Leaves remain small with yellow 
veins, deformed fruits, discoloured green areas and eventually death of the tree  [9]. As a consequence of disease 
infestations, chlorosis - a chlorophyll deficit condition, may also simultaneously arise in citrus plants cause gradual 
diminishing of colour in leaf and results in contrasting the leaf veins. The affected leaves may shrivel a nd fall off, raising 
the pH level of the soil and hinders the ability to absorb essential elements such as iron, magnesium and zinc required 
for the production of chlorophyll in the leaves  [10]. 
Biologists use various conventional techniques such as DNA and RNA hybridization techniques (southern and northern 
blotting), flow cytometric analysis, cloning and sequencing, immunofluorescent staining, reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT -PCR) , fluorescence in situ hybridization,  western blotting,  enzyme -linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) , marker -assisted selection, and gas chromatography with mass spectrometry to detect 3 
 
 diseases in the citrus plants  [12]. Phenol -chloroform, Chelex and solid -phase extraction techniques are used to hydrolyse 
and convert deoxyribose sugar to omega hydroxy acids and extract DNA from the citrus disease infected leaves  [13]. 
The gel electrophoresis technique separates the macromolecules into fragments depending on the size and charge 
accumulated in these molecules  [14, 15] . The PCR method creates multiple copies of the desired DNA segment, 
generating multiple duplicates and identifies the nucleic acid sequence made up of the four nitrogenous bases: adenine, 
thymine, cytosine, and guanine that are utilized for detecting citr us diseases. These conventional techniques  are 
expensive and consume longer time to perform experimentation  [14, 16] . Therefore, researchers are focusing on the 
advancement of modern light -based spectroscopic techniques. These techniques are non -destructive, label -free, and can 
serve as rapid screening tools capable of identifying citrus diseases during the early growth  stage, and potentially 
differentiating the diseases with similar symptoms.   
The optical characteristics of plant tissues can be determined by the way light interacts with them. Light interacts with 
the surface of leaves primarily through three distinct mechanisms: absorption, reflection, and transmission. This 
interaction can be u sed to estimate the types and amounts of various biochemicals present, as well as to identify 
structural and morphological changes in the citrus plants. Reflectance spectra of leaves characterize the biochemical 
composition of the pigments present on the l eaves  [17]. 
Typically, the visible spectrum (400 -700 nm) detects the absorption of photons by chlorophyll, the near -infrared (NIR) 
spectrum (700 -1100 nm) detects the absorption by dry matter, and the short -wave infrared (SWIR) region (1100 -2500 
nm) detects water absor ption in leaves [18]. Leaves are primarily composed of four major elements (oxygen, carbon, 
hydrogen, and nitrogen) and the interaction of photons with chemical bonds leads to the combination of vibrations  [19]. 
Plants absorb light energy primarily through chlorophyll located in specialized organelles called chloroplasts [20]. 
Chlorophyll captures light within the blue and red bands and reflects or allows light to pass through in the green band 
that results in the distinctive green colour of plants [21]. Leaf transmittance varies depending on factors such as leaf 
thickness, presence of pigments and internal structures. Transmittance enables light penetration into lower leaf layers 
and activates various physiological processes including photosynthesis. Sc attering occurs when light interacts with 
various structures within plant tissues, such as cell walls and organelles [22]. Scattering of light within the canopy can 
change its direction, strength, and wavelength distribution, and offers essential insights into the biochemicals present in 
leaves.  
Citrus diseases affect the healthy growth of citrus plants and lead to premature death. The optical spectroscopic 
techniques are modern techniques to identify change in different pigments such as chlorophylls, flavonoids, betacyanins, 
phycobilins, tannins,  betalains, lignin, anthocyanins and carotenoids in leaves  [23, 24] . Raman spectroscopy is one of 
the sophisticated vibrational spectroscopic techniques that can identify the chemical structure, polymorph, crystallinity 4 
 
 and molecular interactions of pigments in the leaves  [25]. Fluorescence spectroscopy is a highly sensitive  analytical 
technique  for detecting disease -induced changes in the amount of chlorophyll in citrus leaves and fruits  [26]. It identifies 
the change in different fluorescent compounds (e.g., chlorophyll, carotenoids, and flavonoids) present in the leaves  [27]. 
The IR spectroscopy is one of the most commonly used vibrational spectroscopy that measures the absorption of 
frequencies of molecules and characterizes the chemical structures or functional groups of the pigments of leaves within 
the NIR, SWIR and mid -IR ranges of electromagnetic spectra  [28]. Hyperspectral cameras are the modern imaging -
based spectroscopy equipment that captures multiple images within the spectral range of ultraviolet (UV), visible, NIR 
and SWIR wavelength ranges and identifies the change in biochemicals in citrus disease inf ected plants  [29]. 
The utilization of artificial intelligence in optical spectroscopy can help in the timely detection of diseases in citrus 
plants . It has been used to develop predictive models that can estimate the severity and spread of the citrus disease  [30]. 
In the past, the multiple types of neural networks within limitations have been utilized to classify leaves as healthy, 
symptomatic, or asymptomatic at an initial  stage of citrus disease  [31]. For example, the artificial neural network (ANN) 
algorithm establishes a non -linear connection between input data (spectra) and output parameters (leaf characteristics) 
that can be influenced by noise and fluctuations arising from environmental factors o r measurement errors. The detection 
of citrus disease in its early stage can be challenging since symptoms may not be visible in the plants  [32]. The concept 
of artificial intelligence is helpful in identifying citrus diseases, which might be difficult to detect through visual 
inspections even by trained scouts. The application of artificial intelligence in spectroscopy for citrus disease detectio n 
has potential to revolutionize the way of monitoring and managing the spread of citrus diseases.  
The review outlines various label -free optical spectroscopic methods as screening tools for the early, effective, and 
reliable detection  of citrus plant diseases in the context of precision agriculture. The objective is to gain insight into the 
detection of different citrus diseases in leaves by employing fluorescence, Raman, infrared (IR) spectroscopy and 
hyperspectral imaging spectroscop y methods. Furthermore, the recent applications of artificial intelligence in spectral 
analysis are reviewed as an effective statistical tool for classifying  between healthy , symptomatic, and asymptomatic  
citrus plants  based on morphology and chemometric c haracteristics.  The review can further encourage the stakeholders 
in improving the advancement and commercialization of field -based optical tools to detect citrus disease in plants.  
2 Spectroscopic techniques and methodologies  
2.1 Fluorescence spectroscopy  
Fluorescence spectroscopy is a modern analytical technique that is used to explain the structure and interactions of a 
molecule  [33]. The principle of fluorescence spectroscopy involves exciting the sample using distinct wavelengths of 
light, and the energy is absorbed by the molecules, which enter into an excited energy state. Consequently, the molecule 5 
 
 emits fluorescent light as it releases the absorbed energy and returns to its ground state. The spectrum is measured from 
the emitted light that provides structural and chemical information about the molecules. Changes in the emission 
wavelength of fluores cent light can indicate alterations in the molecular environment or structural rearrangements of 
the molecules. Fluorescence spectroscopy is a technique for identifying alterations in both the chemical and physical 
structure of fluorescent compounds found in citrus plants. By analyzing characteristic peaks in the fluorescence spectra, 
citrus diseases such as citrus canker, HLB, bacterial spot, CVC, Alternaria brown spot, and black pit can be identified  
[34]. The fluorescence spectra can also measure alterations in the levels of pigments and other metabolic compounds in 
response to citrus diseases. The red and far -red fluorescence can be used to assess changes in chlorophyll levels, while 
blue and green fluor escence can indicate variations in phenolic compounds within the epidermal cells and cell walls of 
green mesophyll cells. Furthermore, fluorescence peak ratios such as 450:650, 550:650, 450:750 and 650:750 can 
measure the growth, mineral deficiency, moistu re stress and pathogen response between healthy and infected citrus 
plants.  
A fluorescence spectroscope consists of four major components: an excitation source, optical fibers, optical filters and 
a spectrometer  [26]. Light emitting diodes (LEDs) and lasers are used as excitation sources in the fluorescence 
spectroscopy. The laser sources of wavelengths of 365 nm, 405 nm, 470 nm and 530 nm with bandpass optical filters 
of 570 nm, 610 nm, 690 nm and 740 nm and LEDs of wavelengths 375 nm, 405 nm, 465 nm, 520 nm and 635 nm are 
often used to excite the plant tissues and record the fluorescence emission spectra  [35-37]. The bifurcated probe delivers 
the light from the excitation source through a central fiber on the sample and collects back the emitted signals through 
multiple outermost fibers to the detector  [35]. The sample is illuminated by the light from the excitation source after 
passing through a monochromator and the resulting fluorescence light is emitted in all directions. The detector receives 
a fraction of the fluorescent light that has passed through a  secondary monochromator. The detector is typically a 
photomultiplier tube or filtered photodiodes  [37]. Depending on the types of channels, there are two types of detectors: 
single -channel or multichannel detectors. The single -channel detector detects the intensity of a single wavelength. The 
multichannel detector can detect the intensities for the complet e range of wavelengths in one snapshot and avoids the 
need of a monochromator. The dual monochromator equipped with a continuous excitation source is considered as the 
advanced fluorescence spectroscope capable of measuring emission spectra in relation to excitation spectra  [38]. 
2.2 Raman spectroscopy  
Raman scattering (or Raman effect) is an essential tool for quantitative  and qualitative  analysis of the biochemicals 
present in plant tissues.  The polarity of a molecule affects the Raman scattering that simulates the vibration modes of 
the molecule and results in low -energy scattered photons. The anti -Stokes and Stokes lines denote shorter and longer 
Raman scattering wavelengths, respectively. R aman spectroscopy analyses chemical bonding and symmetry by 6 
 
 examining their vibrational, and rotational, and low -frequency modes of the molecules  [39]. The stokes Raman 
scattering occurs when the energy or frequency of the scattered photons is lower than that of the incident photon. The 
primary result of this phenomenon is elastic scattering (or Rayleigh scattering). The anti -Stokes Raman scattering takes  
place when the energy of the scattered photons exceeds that of the incident photon. Raman spectroscopy is employed 
to quantify larger molecules such as amino acids, carbohydrates, cellulose, lignin, lipids, and proteins in plants  [40]. A 
change in the level of larger molecules can serve as an indicator for detecting infections in the leaves and fruits of citrus  
plants. Surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is a modern approach for detecting stress -induced diseases 
caused by bacter ia, fungi, and viruses in citrus plants  [41]. The SERS is being considered as a better tool for the 
prevention and control of diseases  at an early stage . The portable Raman spectrometers have less weight, are easy to 
operate, and consume less time for field analysis compared to other lab -based Raman spectrometers  [42]. Microscopic 
imaging techniques are integrated with Raman spectroscopy and SERS to gain more insights into the change in the 
chemical structure of plant tissues.  
Modern Raman spectroscopes use lasers as an excitation source within the UV, visible or NIR ranges  [43]. The most 
commonly used lasers are 532 nm, 638 nm, 785 nm and 1064 nm [44]. The 532 nm laser is the second harmonic of the 
fundamental 1064 nm radiation generated from the neodymium -doped lasing material [45]. The 638 nm laser is a high -
power single -mode diode that balances fluorescence with high signal resolution and is used for better acquisition of 
SERS data  [46]. The 785 nm laser is relatively low cost in comparison to other lasers and has a good balance of detector 
efficiency, spectral resolution, limited interference from fluorescence background, and absorption of heat by the tissue 
sample  [47]. The 1064 nm laser generates minimal fluorescence as the signal is much weaker while the spectra can be 
acquired with good SNR values  [48]. The continuous -wave and pulsed -wave, both, lasers can be used in Raman 
spectroscopy. There are two types of detectors such as dispersive Raman and FT -Raman detectors that are used in 
Raman spectroscopy. The arrays of charge -coupled devices (CCD) are arra nged in dispersive Raman detectors to 
optimize the detector for a wide range of spectra. The spectral range of dispersive Raman detectors can depend on the 
CCD detector size and the focal length of the spectrometer  [48]. The FT -Raman detectors use NIR lasers and the detector 
is selected depending on the excitation wavelength. These detectors are manufactured from germanium, indium and 
gallium arsenide. Laser rejection filters such as notch and long -pass filters, serve th e purpose of distinguishing between 
Raman and Rayleigh -scattered light. The subtractive mode of a triple -grating monochromator is used to isolate the 
desired signal. The holographic filter is used to record the very low Raman shifts  [49]. 
2.3 Infrared spectroscopy  
The IR spectroscopy is a widely used spectroscopic technique to study the interaction of IR radiation and matter through 
absorption, transmittance, or reflection modes  [50]. There can be six types of vibrations involved in a molecule in 7 
 
 interaction with the light such as symmetric and antisymmetric stretching and four other bending modes are scissoring, 
rocking, wagging and twisting of the molecule  [51]. The absorptions take place at resonant frequencies when the 
absorbed frequency aligns with the vibrational frequency of the molecule  [52]. The three primary factors influence the 
resonant energy such as (1) the configuration of the potential energy surfaces, (2) the masses of the atoms involved and 
(3) the vibronic coupling associated with the molecule. It identifies the presence of differe nt functional groups from the 
characteristic bands of the respective intensity and frequency. The IR range could be majorly classified into three 
different ranges: NIR (700 -2500 nm), mid -IR (2500 -25000 nm) and far -IR (25000 nm -1mm) [53, 54] . The specific 
boundaries of the IR region may vary depending on the context and applications. In addition, the measurement of various 
pigments in leaves can be conducted across the visible -to-NIR range of spectrum (400 -780 nm) [55]. The peak 
wavelengths for different chlorophyll pigments lie within the range of 430 to 696 nm [56]. The presence of anthocyanin 
and carotenoids are identified within the range of 530 -550 nm and 420 -503 nm, respectively  [57]. NIR spectroscopy 
(NIRS) -based approach could be utilized as a rapid, non -destructive and, laboratory and field -based technique to identify 
healthy and infected plants grown in a field. The NIR reflectance spectral intensities at wavelengths 870 nm and 970 
nm demonstrate higher accuracy in classifying healthy and HLB -infected orange leaves compared to the visible band at 
570 nm and 670 nm  [58]. In the mid -IR range, (Micro -)FTIR spectroscopy is utilized as a modern analytical technique 
to analyze spatially resolved chemical maps of plant tissues. This region is also sometimes referred to as the "IR 
fingerprint region" because several chemical co mpounds exhibit unique absorption and emission characteristics within 
this range  [59]. For example, the peaks within the range of 5555 -11111 nm have been utilized to identify changes in the 
amount of carbohydrate (starch) in orange leaves due to the infection of HLB disease. The far -IR region (also referred 
to as the terahertz -THz region)  can detect freezing stresses in the citrus leaves  [60]. It can identify the natural sensitivity 
to the vibrations of hydrogen bonds in aqueous solutions and these vibrations are generated with changes in the 
phenotype of plants  [59]. 
Typically, citrus diseases can be detected from the change in the amount of different biochemicals in the leaves or fruits 
of the plants. However, in the scenarios when the disease -infected and nutrient -deficient plants might have similar 
phenotypes or pat terns on the leaves and are often challenging to classify the two different classes of leaves  [61]. 
Machine learning tools can utilize spectral data to distinguish between healthy leaves, symptomatic leaves, 
asymptomatic leaves, and leaves with nutrient deficiencies during the onset of the disease  [62].  
In the context of light sources, the deuterium and tungsten halogen excitation sources are often used in the UV, visible 
and NIRS  [63]. A halogen gas is used in a tungsten lamp to enhance the effectiveness and luminosity of the light emitted. 
Halogen gases such as iodine or bromine react with the tungsten filament, allowing it to burn at a higher temperature 
and produce more light for th e same amount of energy  [64]. The lamps used with ground glass diffusion filter offer 8 
 
 adequate illumination. These lamps are cost -effective and convenient to replace. They produce consistent visible light 
and dissipate excess energy as heat in the IR wavelengths  [65]. A deuterium lamp is a gas-discharge lamp source that 
emits intense, continuous, and stable light within the wavelength range of 112 -900 nm. This light is generated through 
the absorption and subsequent emission of ultraviolet radiation by deuterium gas  [66]. The electric discharge formed 
within the bulb stimulates the molecular deuterium present in it and causes it to attain a heightened energy level. The 
deuterium releases light when it reverts to its original state and generates the continuous ultraviolet radiation  [67]. 
The spectrometer consists of a dispersive element, collimator, an entrance slit, focusing optics, and a detector. The 
collimated light from plain grating then travels through a second spherical mirror that focuses the resulting diffracted 
light. The develo pment of multi -element optical detectors such as CCD and complementary metal -oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) detectors enables us to measure the fast scanning without the need for a moving grating [68]. The CCD detector 
is an integrated circuit consisting of a series of coupled capacitors that transfer the electric charge to the surrounding 
capacitor under the control of the external circuit [69]. The CMOS sensor is a type of image sensor that works on the 
principle of the photoelectric effect. It converts light into electrical signals and processes them to produce an image 
[70]. The CMOS sensors are typically less expensive, consume less power and can offer faster image readout speeds. 
The CMOS sensors have lower image quality compared to CCD sensors due to noise and lower dynamic range. A 
spectrograph interprets the spectrum in to two main regions: functional group region (≥ 1500/cm) and fingerprint region 
(<1500/cm) [71]. 
2.4 Spectral analysis  
In general, the acquired optical spectra are pre -processed to eliminate the noise that help to identify the spectral range 
having prominent spectral peaks. A dark and/or background spectrum is subtracted from the acquired raw spectra. 
Further, a baseline correction is performed to correct for any systematic offsets or slopes in the data  [72, 73] . The 
normalization is performed to scale the spectral data to a common range or mean centre the data, which allows better 
comparison and analysis of spectral features. The standard normal variate ( SNV ) method normalization technique used 
to remove the effects of baseline shifts and intensity variations in spectral data  [74]. The smoothing techniques such as 
Savitzky -Golay (SG) or moving average are applied to eliminate random spectral noise and elevate the signal -to-noise 
ratio. The SG filters attenuate high -frequency components and minimize the least -squares error when fitting a  
polynomial to noisy spectra frames. However, irrespective of the smoothing techniques applied, it is essential to reduce 
noise by distinguishing between the spectral bands to avoid the artifacts induced in the spectra  [75]. Further next, the 
multiplicative scatter correction (MSC) method is applied to correct unwanted variations caused by scattering effects, 
instrumental changes, or sample inhomogeneity that effectively isolates and eliminates complex multiplicative effects  9 
 
 that effectively isolates and eliminates complex multiplicative effects and, enhances the modelling of chemical effects 
that ultimately align the spectral shapes and improve comparability between different samples  [76, 77] .  
2.5 Imaging spectroscopy approach  
Hyperspectral imaging is a type of imaging -based spectroscopic technique that captures multiple images of the object 
across the visible, NIR, and SWIR regions.  The principle behind this method is based on measuring the reflectance of 
an object across a continuous range of wavelengths within the chosen range of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
represented in the form of a hyperspectral cube [78]. The vertical and horizontal axes represent the pixel distances of 
the image and the third axis represents the wavelength. It is a modern form of imaging spectroscopy and is used in plant 
phenotyping  [79]. Digital phenotyping is an advanced non -invasive sensing technique that automatically extracts 
morphological and physiological data from plants during phenotyping experiments  [80]. It could be advantageous to 
utilize the technique for measuring the biochemical changes in addition to morphological and structural changes in 
disease infected or stressed citrus plants grown in a large farm  [81]. Moreover, an aerial Light Detection and Ranging 
(LiDAR) system operating within a wavelength range of 250 -2500 nm is utilized for detecting citrus diseases in farms  
[11, 82] . The combined technology of hyperspectral imaging and LiDAR is a modern remote sensing technology used 
to detect citrus diseases on large farms, especially in scenarios where manual inspection of every plant is not feasible.  
Hyperspectral imaging  system consists of tungsten -halogen lamps , objective lenses, imaging spectrograph and CCD or 
CMOS detector  [83]. Halogen lamps are commonly used in indoor hyperspectral imaging experiments related to plants 
(Fig. 2). These lamps are made up of a transparent glass enclosure containing a tungsten filament with halogen gas and 
a small quantity of either iodine or bromine  [64, 84] . These lamps provide a smooth and monotonic spectrum within the 
spectral range of visible (RGB camera) and NIR regions. The objective lenses determine the spatial resolution of the 
hyperspectral image. The selection of objective lenses is based upon the amount of incoming light from the observed 
area reaching the detector. The light captured by the objective lens then enter s the spectrograph.  The spectrograph 
consists of diffraction grating that disperses light into distinct wavelengths  [82]. Most hyperspectral cameras available 
on the market use reflection gratings because of their beneficial characteristics that include the lack of high aberration, 
minimal distortion, low f -number, and broader field size  [84]. The dispersed light is allowed to fall on the detector, 
where the photons are converted into electrical energy.  The CCD and CMOS detectors are often used in hyperspectral 
imaging systems. Hyperspectral cameras capture the images within the extended wavelength range from UV, visible, 
NIR and SWIR ranges  [83]. An airborne hyperspectral system consists of a hyperspectral camera, micro -computer 
system and navigation satellite system that are installed to capture the images within a continuous range of wavelengths 
of an area  [79].  10 
 
 The acquisition of hyperspectral images involves obtaining three -dimensional hypercube data using four 
fundamental methods - point, line, area, and snap -shot scanning techniques [85]. The point scanning is a type of 
scanning technique that acquires the spectral information of the sample by scanning it one point at a time  [86]. It 
consumes a significant amount of time for sample positioning and requires a stable experimental setup for high -
quality image reconstruction. The line scanning technique is another type of scanning technique that acquires the 
spectral information of th e sample by scanning it along a single line or several parallel lines together  [87]. The 
area scanning is another type of scanning technique that scans two -dimensional monochromatic images at one 
wavelength at a time. The snap -shot scanning technique acquires hyperspectral images during an integration time 
of an array detector. The advan tage of snapshot scanning is that it can acquire both spatial and spectral data within 
a shorter acquisition time and prevent motion artifacts. Image pre -processing is conducted following the 
completion of image acquisition  [88]. The raw hyperspectral image is affected by the noise coming from the 
illuminating source, sensitivity of the detector and due to the transmission effect of multiple optical components 
in the system. The spectral calibration is necessary to eliminate thes e issues and is achieved through the use of 
white and black references. The black reference image is captured when both the light source and camera shutters 
are turned off.  The white reference image is obtained by directing the camera towards a highly refl ective white 
surface made of uniform materials  (e.g., teflon and spectralon). The noise present in these hyperspectral images 
is majorly in the form of dead pixels or spikes  [89]. The presence of dead pixels is a result of irregularities in the 
detector that result in permanent black pixels. The pretreatment techniques including spectral normalization, SG 
filtration, SNV and EMSC techniques are applied to eliminate the variations of the spectrum  [90]. The derivative 
techniques are often applied to eliminate the constant offset or linear baseline shift. The segmentation divides the 
image into various distinct segments by considering their similarities in terms of spatial or spectral properties. 
Spectra l segmentation requires a greater computational time when contrasted with spatial segmentation 
methods [89]. Following spectral pre -processing, the hyperspectral image data is typically corrected, transformed 
or enhanced in quality, subsequently utilized for feature extraction based on the objective (Fig. 3).  
3 Applications of spectroscopic techniques in citrus diseases  
Citrus plants  are susceptible to several diseases infected by fungi, bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens that can impact 
their health and fruit production  [91, 92] . The optical spectroscopic techniques use the interaction between 
electromagnetic radiation and matter to yield insights into the molecular composition of plant tissues  [93]. These 
techniques have demonstrated numerous times the capability to identify changes induced by pathological infection in 
citrus plants, which are manifested through characteristic spectral patterns, thereby offering the potential of being a 11 
 
 mass screening tool for rapid diagnosis in the field  [25]. To harness the potential of these spectroscopic techniques, it 
could be implemented in conjunction with other methods such as integration to unmanned aerial vehicles or remote 
sensing approaches, which can further provide diverse applications to enhance the crop yields and prevent the 
transmission of diseases in the field  [54]. This specific segment elucidates the various applications of these techniques 
and methods in the identification of numerous diseases in citrus plants, which are succinctly summarized in Table 1.  
3.1 Applications of fluorescence spectroscopy  
Fluorescence spectroscopy is a modern  technique that can be employed in citrus orchards to study and identify specific 
disease symptoms, monitor disease progression and assess the effectiveness of disease management strategies  [94]. The 
composition of multiple fluorophores in a leaf determines its emission spectra. The fluorophores identify changes in the 
chemical and physiological characteristics of citrus plants  [36]. The major benefit of fluorescence spectroscopy is that 
it can be deployed as a real -time visualization tool in the agriculture fields  [95]. 
Fluorescence spectral acquisition can be captured through a 10 mW green laser (532 nm) excitation that can stimulate 
lemon leaves and allow measurement of the chlorophyll fluorescence ratio between bands at 685 nm and 735 nm. This 
measurement helps distinguish between mechanical stress and disease stress caused by pathogens in citrus plants. 
Mechanical stresses experienced by plants are typically temporary and last for a short duration of time ranging from 
minutes to hours. How ever, a plant may take several  days or even months for the symptoms of stress to manifest. 
Mechanical stress affects growth more slowly and is less severe than stress caused by pathogens [96]. The utilization of 
fluorescence spectroscopy allows for the differentiation of healthy, nutrient -deficient, and HLB -infected leaves in 
Valencia and Hamlin oranges.  The yellow and green excitation fluorescence spectra are fitted into the bagging on 
decision trees classifier to classify the nutrient‐deficient and HLB -infected leaves  [27]. The ratio of fluorescence 
intensities of blue to red excitation (452:685) and blue to far -red (452:735) is used to detect the healthy and citrus canker 
infection in orange plants [94]. The blue -green and chlorophyll fluorescence  were demonstrated to assess the various 
stages of infection in citrus canker diseas e [97]. In healthy and asymptomatic leaves, α -tocopherol and gallic acid 
exhibited higher fluorescence band intensities  [98]. The fluorescence intensity was measured across a range of 
wavelengths from 450 nm to 800 nm in leaves using excitations at 405 nm and 470 nm. The selected bands were 
determined by changes in intensity caused by diseases and utilized to distinguish diseases  with similar visual symptoms, 
such as citrus canker vs. citrus scab and HLB vs. zinc deficiency in citrus plant s.  
A violet -blue laser operating at 405 nm is utilised to record the chlorophyll spectra of grapefruit leaves infected by citrus 
canker. The 405 nm laser is often used as it lies within the ‘soret’ band of chlorophyll and can be used to study the 
structures and functions of botanical cells and tissues  [35]. The ‘soret’ band appears as a wide absorption peak within 12 
 
 400-450 nm in the spectrum. It arises from the movement of electrons from the lower to the higher excited state [99]. 
The emission chlorophyll spectrum shows a major peak at 683 nm associated with the photosystem (PS) II whose 
primary function is to harvest light energy and use it to oxidize water molecules, releases oxygen and generates high -
energy electrons that are p assed on to other components of photosynthetic chain of electron transport [100] . Ultimately, 
the electron transport chain results in the generation of ATP and NADPH, which power the calvin cycle. The spectral 
band of 700 -750 nm represents both PSs. PS -I consists of proteins complex, pigments, and cofactors that work together 
to captu re light and transform it into chemical energy [101] . The core of PS -I contains a reaction center constituted by 
chlorophyll molecules that are capable of absorbing light in the red (around 700 nm) spectrum. These chlorophyll 
molecules absorb light and become excited and transfer their energy to a nearby mo lecule called a primary electron 
acceptor and initiates a chain of electron transfer reactions [102, 103]  (Fig. 4).  
The broad class of secondary metabolites known as phenolic compounds are found in the plants. The occurrence of 
different phenolic compounds is explained by the broad peak at 530 nm  [35]. They are synthesized via the 
phenylpropanoid pathway and are present in different parts of plants. The most abundant and diverse classes of phenolic 
compounds include flavones, flavonols, flavanones, isoflavones and anthocyanins  [104, 105] . Flavonoids, is another 
prominent category of phenolic compounds found in plants, encompassing hydroxycinnamic and hydroxybenzoic acids. 
As a disease progresses within the plant, the production of caffeic acid, tannins, flavins, chlorogenic acid including  
flavonoids are induced in the infected leaves of the plant  [106] . These phenolic acids have demonstrated a variety of 
roles in biological functions including the antibacterial, antioxidant, and anti -inflammatory activities  [107] . There are a 
group of phenolic compounds that include resveratrol, pterostilbene and viniferins. Stilbenes are another example of 
polyphenols, which is naturally produced by plants in response to various stressors such as UV radiation, fungal 
infections, insect harm or physical damage and, act as phytoalexins that help in protecting the plant from pathogens and 
environmental threats  [108] . The most studied stilbene is trans -resveratrol, which has gained popularity for its potential 
health benefits. The fluorescence spectrum of trans -resveratrol typically exhibits an emission peak in the range of 320 -
340 when excited at a wavelength of around 280 nm  [109] . Thus, the variations observed in fluorescence emission 
spectra can be utilized to gain valuable insights not only into specific plant metabolites but also into the multiple changes  
occurring in the local physiological environment, induced due to various external stresses and infections  
3.2 Applications of Raman spectroscopy  
Raman spectroscopy has emerged as a promising analytical technique for the characterization of citrus diseases in plants 
[48, 110] . This spectroscopic method utilizes the interaction between light and matter to detect the compositional and 
structural changes at molecular level occurring within the affected plant tissues to generate a unique spectral fingerprint 
of the sample under in vestigation. The technique enables the identification and characterization of specific biomolecules 13 
 
 associated with citrus diseases, such as phytochemicals and metabolites  [111] . This non -destructive and label -free 
technique offers several advantages, including quick analysis, high sensitivity, and the ability to probe samples in situ. 
It has demonstrated the ability to identify the unique spectral fingerprints of the pathogens a nd their byproducts in citrus 
plant tissues  [112, 113] . The application of Raman spectroscopy in citrus disease research holds great potential for early 
and rapid disease detection, monitoring disease progression, and guiding targeted interventions for effective disease 
management in the citrus industry.  
In 2019, Wang and their colleagues conducted a research wherein Raman spectra were acquired from intact leaves 
representing the class of asymptomatic, symptomatic, and healthy leaves. The measurements were conducted on the 
midrib section (mesophyll cells) of the leaves. Their study reported the capability of the Raman method to identify the 
three types of carbohydrates - glucose, sucrose, and starch present in leaves in different health conditions of the plant. 
The asymptomatic leaves exhibited relatively l ower levels of carotene, sucrose, glucose, and chlorophyll in contrast to 
healthy leaves while an increase in the starch and polyphenol content were observed in asymptomatic conditions of the 
leaves.  The BP -ANN model demonstrated a root -mean -square error (RMSE) of 0.0616 and a coefficient of 
determination (R2) of 0.9598  [114]  (Fig. 5). 
Sanchez et al. conducted Raman analysis of nutrient -deficient, and HLB -infected leaves  with healthy leaves  of oranges 
and grapefruits. They observed that the Raman peak (1601−1630 cm−1) associated with lignin, which significantly 
contributes to plant defence , was higher in severe -stage than the early -stage infected grapefruit leaves while no 
significant change was observed in case of orange leaves. In healthy grapefruit leaves, the xylan Raman peak (1218 
cm−1) intensity was observed higher compared to 1226 cm−1, while the opposite trend was observed in HLB -infected 
grapefruit plants. Further, no discernible difference was observed between infected and healthy orange leaves. The 
Raman peak (1525 cm−1) of carotenoids exhibited an increase in intensity of infected orange leaves . However, there 
was no change was observed in the case of grapefruit leaves.  Polyphenols Raman peak (1247 cm−1) was observed in 
nutrient -deficient grapefruit leaves while it was not prominently visible in orange leaves. These results led to the 
conclusion that these citrus plants exhibit cultivar -specific responses to different stresses. Moreover, it was also 
observed that the lignin Raman peak of nutrient -deficient leaves was significantly higher compared to healthy and HLB -
infected leaves, which could be potentially utilised in differentiating the nutrient deficits from HLB infection  [115] . 
HLB infected plants are vulnerable to the onset of citrus canker and blight that are other common diseases found in 
citrus plant s. Early identification of various diseases, especially those with similar symptoms can play a crucial role in 
optimizing pesticide use and an effective management of the citrus diseases. The Raman spectra acquired from orange 
leaves revealed that the lign in and xylan spectral peaks were enhanced in HLB -infected leaves, whereas these intensities 
were reduced in leaves affected by citrus canker in comparison to the healthy leaves. The PCA analysis was performed 14 
 
 in which the loading plot representing the peak of the lignin (1525 and 1630 cm−1), cellulose (915, 1326, and 1630 
cm−1), hydrocarbon (1440, 1445, and 1448 cm−1), xylan (1184 cm−1), and carotenoid (1525 cm−1) were utilised as 
predictors. The orthogonal PLS -DA enabled the differentiation of healthy plant from those affected by citrus canker, 
HLB, and HLB -blight, achieving an overall accuracy rate of 92%  [25].  
The combination of three techniques high -performance liquid chromatography (HPLC),  Raman spectroscopy, and mass 
spectrometry can collectively enhance the accuracy in identifying the biochemical changes  in citrus plant s during HLB 
infection and the progression of the disease. The occurrence of HLB infection increases the content of p -coumaric acid 
and decreases the amount of lutein in the leaves. These changes were identified through Raman spectroscopy at an early 
stage.  The combination of HPLC and Raman spectroscopy can identify the variations in carotenoid concentrations, 
which may provide an insight into the regulation of plants across various stages of their growth cultivated in both 
outdoor fields and controlled gree nhouse environments  [86, 116] . 
3.3 Applications of infrared spectroscopy  
Vibrational spectroscopies, such as IR spectroscopy, can identify the presence of various biochemicals in citrus plant s 
grown on large farms  [117] . The IR spectr al measurements can be acquired in three  different  modes such as absorption, 
reflection, or transmission of IR radiation by molecules present in leaves  [118, 119] . It identifies the nature and structure 
of cell walls in plants. The spectra recorded within visible (400 -750 nm), NIR (1100 -2500 nm) and the mid -IR (2500 -
25000 nm) ranges can exhibit distinctive features that can be utilized to detect the disease or stre ss or deficiency in 
plants with a higher accuracy  [120]  (Fig. 6).  
In three separate studies, the spectral properties of leaves infected with HLB in the NIR r ange were studied in which a 
field-portable spectroradiometer was used to measure the spectral data within 350 -2500 nm. A portable halogen lamp 
(500 W) was used to excite the samples. The spectral features were analysed using different machine learning algorithms 
such as support vector machine (SVM ) and  k-nearest neighbour  (k-NN) with an  overall classification accuracy that 
varies in the range 80 -97%. The results of all three investigations suggested that the visible -NIR region holds promise 
for distinguishing HLB -infected leaves. Moreover, it was emphasized that variations in different environmental factors 
under field conditions could lead to a decrease in accuracy. Hence, to enhance the accuracy in classification, it is 
essential to obtain multiple measuremen ts of the same plant  [121] . 
In another study, the evaluation of a four -band optical sensor consisting of two visible bands and two NIR bands, was 
conducted to identify HLB infection in citrus plant s of Mid -sweet and Valencia orange cultivars. The four -band optical 
sensor classified the canopy of healthy and HLB -infected citrus plant s at four selected wavelengths: 570 nm, 670 nm, 
870 nm, and 970 nm. Using the five classification techniques (decision tree, k -NN, logarithmic regression, neural 15 
 
 network, and SVM), the SVM achieved over 97% accuracy in distinguishing between HLB -infected and healthy plant s 
using five measurements from each plant . The logarithmic regression  exhibited the largest classification error among 
the five classification techniques exceeding 34%. The findings indicated that the four -band sensor has the potential to 
detect infected citrus plants at the symptomatic stage in field -based measurements. However, this study did not evaluate 
the capability of sensors to identify othe r stress factors including nutrient deficiencies. It might be possible that the 
sensor may provide more false positive results when exposed to other stressors. Furthermore, the performance of the 
sensor and classification algorithms applied on different citrus types could offer valuable insights and expand the uses 
of the tool  [58]. 
Citrus rind disorders have significant impacts on citrus fruits that affect their appearance, quality, and marketability of 
fruits. This disorder does not manifest during harvesting or post -harvesting treatments but develops about 1 -5 weeks 
after harvestin g. The NIR -based methods can be utilized to determine  the soluble solids content and total acidity in  
citrus  fruits. Therefore, the NIRS based non -destructive tool could be explored to screen the citrus fruits based on their 
quality rather than damaged app earance caused by rind disorders  [122] . Limited research has been conducted to develop 
effective technology capable of predicting and monitoring physiological symptoms in citrus rind disorders.  The NIRS 
was employed to analyse the spectral properties of various fungal diseases found in citrus fruits, including citrus black 
spot, melanose, greasy spot, green mold, blue mold, sooty mold, and anthracnose. As this article primarily focuses on 
diseas e detection in citrus plants through their leaves, readers seeking information about fungal diseases,  particularly in 
fruits, may refer to the cited published article  [119] . 
The NIRS reflectance spectra acquired from dried orange and grapefruit leaves within the range of 400 -2500 nm was 
studied. HLB -positive and HLB -negative leaves showed variations in visible range chlorophyll absorption peaks due to 
differences in the amount s of carbohydrates and cuticle waxes. The PLSR model classified these leaves with an accuracy 
of 92 -99%. Laser -Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) is a powerful analytical technique that can be used for 
disease detection in citrus plants. The LIBS combin ed with NIR (i.e., LIBS -NIR) was utilized for the detection of HLB 
disease in citrus leaves. The analysis of atomic absorption spectroscopy and the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test indicated a 
reduction in calcium (Ca) and zinc (Zn) levels in the infected leaves. H owever, potassium (K) was found to be unaffected 
by the presence of the disease. The multi -layer perceptron PCA (MLP -PCA) achieved an accuracy of 89.5% during 
training and 95.7% during testing . It demonstrate d the combination of LIBS and NIR is an efficient technique for 
identifying HLB disease in citrus leaves.  [123] . 
Li et al. conducted a comparison of reflectance spectra between healthy and HLB -infected leaves. The elevated spectral 
intensities in visible bands attributed to the yellowish symptoms on infected leaves and reduced intensities in NIR bands 
show the impedi ments in water transportation to the leaves. The red edge position (REP) indicated a gradual shift 16 
 
 towards the red bands with increasing infection levels. The threshold segmentation using REP achieved a classification 
accuracy of over 90%. The four -point linear extrapolation method proved more effective than the three -point Lagrangian 
interpolation method  and show ed the capability of REP as a valuable indicator for differentiating between healthy and 
HLB -infected leaves  [124, 125] . 
By using the mid -IR spectroscopy, the processed HLB -infected and zinc -deficient leaves of Hamlin, Valencia, and 
Midsweet  oranges in the form of powder were utilized for measuring spectral data in the ATR mode (Sankaran, Ehsani, 
et al., 2010). The change in the spectral peak within the range of 9000 -10500 nm differentiated between healthy and 
infected leaves.  This carbohydrate  peak indicated the accumulation of starch in the HLB -infected leaves. The kNN 
algorithm achieved higher classification accuracy of over 90% than QDA algorithm  within the wavelength range of 
5150 -10720 nm  [54]. Utilizing the symptoms , even e xpert scouts often encounter challenges in distinguishing HLB and 
CVC diseases due to their similar visual symptoms (yellow blotches) on leaves. The spectral data from eight Valencia 
sweet orange leaves were collected using ATR -FTIR, and classified using PLSR algorithm. The results showed an 
accuracy of 93.8% in identifying healthy, CVC -symptomatic, and HLB -infected (both symptomatic and asymptomatic) 
leaves based on the presence of carbohydrates and other secondary metabolit es [7].  
Hawkins et. al., measured data from dried HLB infected orange and grapefruit leaves, which was grinded into powder 
form. The spectra were acquired using FTIR -ATR spectroscopy within  5882 -11111 nm. The carbohydrates peaks within 
the 8474 -11111 nm were utilized in identifying infected plants and non -infected plants with an accuracy greater than 
95% using the chemometrics model (Hawkins et al., 2010). In another study by Hawkins et. al. , the FTIR spectra of 
HLB and other citrus maladies were compared. The spec tra of processed grapefruit leaves were measured using the 
FTIR spectrometer with a deuterated triglycine sulfate (DTGS) detector within 5882 -14285 nm. The spectra of HLB -
infected leaves showed a sharp and asymmetrical peak at 9803 nm and two sharp peaks a t 8695 nm and 9285 nm while 
healthy leaves showed a broad carbohydrate flat peak centred at around 9505 nm and two weak peaks at 8695 nm and 
9285 nm. The PCA and multiple linear regression were analyzed to classify the HLB, nutrient deficiencies , and citru s 
diseases in leaves . The study demonstrated that  different citrus diseases and deficiencies exhibit similar carbohydrate 
transformations as observed in the spectra of HLB -infected plants [28] (Fig. 7). 
 
 
 
 17 
 
 To explore changes in carbohydrates (starch and soluble sugars) within the phloem of citrus leaf midribs; the study by 
Yang et. al., reported a semi -quantification model to predict carbohydrate concentrations within 4000 –675 cm-1 using 
the micro -FTIR spectroscopy . The least squares support vector machine regression (LS -SVR) model in conjunction 
with the RF algorithm achieved the most accurate predictions with determination coefficients of prediction (R2P) values 
reaching 0.85 and 0.87 for starch and soluble sugar concentrations in leaf midribs. Moreover, the multi -layer perceptron 
classification models demonstrated a classification accuracy of 94% and 87% in identifying HLB disease using the 
complete spectral range and the optimal wavenumbers determined through the RF algorithm, respectively. The  
technique  has the potential to be an essential tool for predicting carbohydrate concentration and detecting HLB disease  
[59]. 
3.4 Application of imaging spectroscopy  
Hyperspectral imaging is a modern method that analyzes  the composition and characteristics of plant tissues by 
capturing and examining their spectral data. It is a powerful optical sensing technique used to collect and analyze spectral 
data typically captured in the range of visible light (400 -700 nm) and extends into the NIR and SWIR regions, which 
can range from around 700 to 2500 nm  [126, 127] . Hyperspectral imaging can identify disease symptoms at early stages 
before they become visually apparent. It quantifies the severity of citrus diseases by analyzing the extent of spectral 
changes in infected plants  [125, 128] . It has emerged as an indispensable tool in citrus disease management, facilitating 
early detection, precise classification, and monitoring of disease progression  [129] .   
Indoor (lab -based) and outdoor (portable) hyperspectral imaging systems were utilized for the detection of citrus disease 
in orange, lemon, lime, and grapefruit plants. Hyperspectral images of citrus leaves were acquired at varying spectral 
ranges dependin g on the instruments used. Wang et. al., acquired hyperspectral images from healthy and HLB -infected 
navel orange plant s within 400 -1000 nm. A method was proposed for the instantaneous detection of symptomatic and 
asymptomatic leaves to rapidly identify ci trus HLB disease. The comparative analysis of five different data pretreatment 
methods revealed that the least squares -SVM  (LS-SVM) based on adaxial and abaxial leaf surface spectra provide the 
best recognition results for classifying healthy and infected orange leaves. It achieved training and testing accuracies of 
100% and 92.5%, respectively [114] . Li et al. utilized hyperspectral imaging along with the competitive adaptive 
reweighted sampling (CARS) and LS -SVM algorithms to measure chlorophyll present in lemon leaves infected with 
citrus yellow vein clearing virus (CYVCV). During the onset of CYVCV, hyperspectral images of lemon leaves infected 
with CYVCV were acquired within 300 -1100 nm and revealed a reduction in the amount of chlorophyll in mesophyll 
tissues near the veins of affected leaves.  The LS -SVM models were used to predict chlorophyll co ntent in lemon leaves. 
The characteristic wavelength peaks at 550 nm, 680 nm and 680 –750 nm  were selected  to identify healthy and CYVCV 
infected leaves. The prediction model utilized wavelengths extracted through the CARS algorithm achieved a RMSE of 18 
 
 0.10, a relative prediction deviation of 3.91, and a determination coefficient of 0.94 in the testing set. The observed 
results indicated that the method could help in rapid detection and quick visualization of chlorophyll levels and in 
identifying the sym ptoms of CYVCV disease in lemon leaves  [130] . 
The combination of hyperspectral imaging and carbohydrate metabolism analysis was proposed to create whole -season 
classification models for detecting citrus HLB disease. This approach is particularly useful due to the extended 
asymptomatic period of HLB in fection and the similarities in symptoms with nutrient -deficient citrus plant s. The 
accumulation of sucrose in the infected leaves was observed steadier compared to fructose, glucose, and starch 
throughout both the hot and cool seasons while an opposite pa ttern observed in iron deficient leaves. The LS -SVM 
technique achieved classification accuracies of 90.2% for healthy, 96% for HLB -infected, and 92.6% for iron -deficient 
leaves within 450 -1023 nm across different seasons. [131] . 
Among remote sensing applications, airborne hyperspectral imaging approaches have demonstrated their suitability at 
the farm and regional scales. Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) technologies offer a promising avenue for on -field and 
farm surveillance, effect ively curbing data acquisition expenses. While fewer studies focused on a regional scale for 
plant disease evaluation, those investigations demonstrate the potential for upscaling remote sensing -based approaches. 
A point of particular interest in integrati ng hyperspectral imaging tools with UAV technologies as an effective 
intervention for differentiation of disease infections and monitoring their stages of development in the farm field  [129] . 
Li et. al. conducted an experiment employing the potential of an airborne hyperspectral imaging system to acquire 
images for detecting HLB disease. Spectral angle mapping using pure endmembers helped differentiate healthy and 
infected areas with HLB diseas e. The experimental outcomes were compared using supervised and unsupervised 
methods, yielding accuracies within the range of 40.9% to 63.6%. The focus of this study was the evaluation of the 
proposed novel approach termed as 'extended spectral angle mappi ng (ESAM)’, which was introduced for the detection 
of HLB disease. The algorithms calculate the spectral similarity between two spectra of each pixel in an image in terms 
of the angle between them. ESAM exhibited superior performance, achieving a detection  accuracy of 86% compared to 
those other two methods. The findings of the study illustrated that the accuracy of detection in airborne hyperspectral 
imagery could be elevated by implementing the pure endmember extraction and inclusion of the red -edge posit ion of 
HLB and thereby demonstrated the potential for the detection of HLB disease using hyperspectral imagery [125] . 
Furthermore, an improvement was made by Xiaoling et al. in which another model, namely the fully connected neural 
network, was employed. The research investigated combining various spectral features to improve the model potential 
to identify HLB -related features and enhance its resistance to interference.  The approach provided a more intuitive way 
of capturing the disease distribution within the canopy, offering valuable insights for the precise removal of branches 
and stems affected by HLB  [132] . 19 
 
 Francisco et al. conducted a study wherein hyperspectral images of Valencia orange plants captured by both aircraft and 
UAVs within the 530 -900 nm range were classified into healthy and HLB -infected plants. The results obtained using 
the UAV -based hyperspectral imaging sensors have a higher resolution (5.45 cm/pixel) compared to aircraft -based 
sensors which have a lower spatial resolution (0.5 m/pixel). The stepwise regression analysis was used to identify 
relevant features from spectral images captured by both UAVs and aircraft. The differences were observed in the 710 
nm and NIR -R ind ex can classify between healthy and infected plants at both spatial resolutions.  The utilization of a 
kernel -enhanced SVM outperformed in classifying hyperspectral images of healthy and infected orange plants. The 
UAV -based system demonstrated a classification accuracy range of 67 -85% while aircraft -based sensors showed an 
accuracy range of 61 -74%. Therefore, in cases of symptoms at the branch level images taken with high -resol ution aerial 
sensing techniques (UAV) at low altitudes demonstrated promising results for the detection of  infected plant s. Scouting 
is a key practice in HLB disease control, the study indicates that this approach could serve as a quick sensing technology 
to assist scouts, thereby reducing scouting costs and enhancing scouting efficiency  [134, 135]  (Fig. 8).  
The exploration of an integrated approach involving hyperspectral imaging, fluorescence, and thermal imaging for crop 
monitoring remains largely unexplored, having only been initiated. The combination of an airborne system 
encompassing optical hyperspectral, thermal, and fluorescence data carries the promise of early detection capabilities 
in the field and facilitating improved monitoring of plant diseases. The success of such integration ha s already been 
demonstrated by studies focusing on quality control and fruit safety  [11].20 
 
 Table 1  Summary of optical spectroscopic techniques for detection of citrus disease in leaves.  
References  Samples  Spectral bands  Spectroscopic 
techniques  Data analysis methods  Major work / observation  
[136]  Orange leaves  685-735 nm  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  Figure of merit  Fluorescence spectral analysis was conducted to discriminate 
citrus canker infected leaves from healthy leaves (excitation lasers: 
Nd:YAG -532 nm and HeCd -442 nm).  
[96] Rangpur orange leaves  680–712 nm and 712 –750 nm  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  Figure of merit  Two chlorophyll fluorescence bands ratio was used to detect and 
discriminate between mechanical stress and citrus canker induced -
stress in plants (Nd:YAG excitation laser -532 nm).  
[128]  Grapefruits  553 nm, 677 nm, 718 nm, and 
858 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging  PCA  Classification of hyperspectral images to distinguish citrus canker 
from healthy fruits and other diseases, including wind scar, cake 
melanose, greasy spot, specular melanose, and copper burn.  
[126]  
 Grapefruits  450-930 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging  Spectral information divergence 
(SID) mapping  Classification of hyperspectral images of citrus canker from 
healthy fruits and other diseased peel conditions such as melanose, 
wind scar, scab, insect damage, and greasy spot.  
[97] Citrus leaves  547–620 nm, 680 –712 nm, 712 –
750 nm, and 680 –800 nm  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  Figure of merit  Distinguishing healthy leaves from citrus cankered leaves using 
fluorescence spectra obtained under laboratory conditions with an 
Nd:YAG excitation laser (532 nm).  
[94] Mandarin orange, sweet orange, 
key lime, Persian lime and 
Rangpur lime leaves  520-540 nm, 680 –712 nm, 712 -
750 nm and 680 -800 nm  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  Figure of merit  Laser induced fluorescence spectra (excitation: Nd:YAG -532 nm) 
were analyzed to distinguish citrus canker from CVC, citrus scab, 
and HLB diseases. The diagnostic method for citrus canker 21 
 
 exhibited high sensitivity (~90%) but, low specificity (~70%), 
possibly due to signal collection from a small area of the leaf.  
[137]  Orange and grapefruit leaves  900-1150 cm-1 ATR -FTIR 
spectroscopy  Principal component regression 
and PLSR  The ATR -FTIR spectra of leaves showed a rise in the carbohydrate 
peak within the range of 900 –1180 cm-1, which was used to 
distinguish between healthy and HLB -infected plants.  
[54] Hamlin orange, Valencia orange 
and Midsweet orange leaves 
(powder)  952–1112 cm−1 Mid-IR 
spectroscopy  QDA and k -NN The carbohydrate peak within the range of 952 –1112 cm−1 showed 
the accumulation of starch in HLB -infected leaves. This spectral 
peak differentiated  the infected leaves from healthy and nutrient -
deficient leaves.  
[121]  Orange leaves  350–1000 nm, 1000 –1850 nm 
and 1850 –2500 nm  NIR 
spectroscopy  QDA and SIMCA  Identification of spectral features within 350 -2500 nm to classify 
the NIR spectra of healthy leaves from  HLB infected leaves using 
the machine learning techniques.  
[58] Valencia orange leaves  570 nm, 670 nm, 870  nm, and 
970 nm NIR 
spectroscopy  k-NN, SVM and decision trees  HLB detection in citrus leaves was conducted using four narrow -
band sensors, and the spectra were classified using the machine 
learning techniques.  
[27] Hamlin and Valencia orange 
leaves  - Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  Bagged decision tree and Naïve 
Bayes classifier  Healthy and HLB -infected leaves were differentiated by analysing  
yellow, red, and far -red (NIR) fluorescence spectra when excited 
with UV, blue, green, and red wavelengths under both laboratory 
and field conditions  
[7] Valencia sweet orange leaves 
(powder)  900-1175 cm−1 ATR -FTIR 
spectroscopy  PLSR  Healthy, HLB, and CVC -symptomatic leaves were identified 
based on changes in the amount  of secondary metabolites 22 
 
 (hesperidin and umbelliferone) and carbohydrates, using the ATR -
FTIR spectra.  
[95] Navel oranges, Pineapple 
orange, Sunburst, Murcott, 
Rhode Red Valencia, Hamlin, 
Valencia, Grapefruit leaves.  590 nm, 688 nm, and 750 nm.  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  Bagged decision tree and Naïve 
Bayes classifier  Yellow, yellow -to-far-red, and far -red fluorescence spectra were 
measured from healthy, HLB -symptomatic and HLB -
asymptomatic leaves . Healthy and HLB -symptomatic leaves  were 
classified  with an accuracy of 97% using a bagged decision tree 
classifier (excitation wavelengths: ultraviolet -375 nm, blue -465 
nm, green -520 nm, and red -635 nm).  
[134]  Citrus orchard  530 nm, 560 nm, 660 nm, 690 
nm, 710 nm, and 900 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging  SVM  High -resolution aerial imaging of a citrus orchard was captured 
using a hyperspectral camera mounted on a remote sensing multi -
rotor UAV to classify the healthy and HLB -infected citrus trees 
using the SVM technique.  
[125]  Citrus leaves  700 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging  Extended spectral angle mapping 
(ESAM) and K -means  
 Detection of healthy and HLB -infected plant  canopies from 
airborne hyperspectral images and these images were classified 
using different machine learning techniques.  
[138]  Citrus leaves  229.7 nm, 247.9 nm, 280.3 nm, 
393.5 nm, 397.0 nm, and 769.8 
nm Laser -induced 
breakdown 
spectroscopy  QDA and SVM  Classification between healthy leaves and other similar anomalies 
such as citrus cankered,  HLB -infected,  and nutrient -deficient 
leaves with an average accuracy of 97.5% using the SVM 
technique.  
[36] Mandarin orange, sweet orange, 
key lime, Persian lime and 
Rangpur lime leaves  550 nm, 560 nm, 570 nm, 580 nm 
and 690nm  Fluorescence 
imaging 
spectroscopy  SVM  Classification of HLB -infected from zinc deficient leaves  and 
citrus canker from scab  using fluorescence images with higher 
accuracies of 95% and 97.8%, respectively.  23 
 
 [112]  Sweet orange, Persian lime and 
Mexican lime leaves  905 cm−1, 1043 cm−1, 1127 cm−1, 
1208 cm−1, 1370 cm−1, 1272 cm−1, 
1340 cm−1, and 1260 –1280 cm−1 Raman 
Spectroscopy  PCA -LDA  Raman spectra were analysed to discriminate between healthy and 
HLB -infected  leaves. The spectral signature related to the presence 
of amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids were identified. 
PCA -LDA analysis showed a precision of 89.2 % in differentiating 
HLB -infected leaves from healthy leaves.  
[23] Citrus plant  960 cm-1, 1087 cm-1, 1109 cm-1, 
1154 cm-1, 1225 cm-1, 1385 cm-1, 
1462 cm-1, 1707cm-1, 2882 cm-1, 
2982 cm-1, and 3650 cm-1 FTIR -ATR 
spectroscopy  Spectral peak analysis  Pentanone was identified as a spectral marker for distinguishing 
between healthy and HLB -infected plants caused by Ca. L. The 
marker was observed as absent in the infected plants.  
[139]  Sweet orange leaves  410-630 nm and 650 -800 nm  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  PLSR  Healthy, HLB -infected, and CVC -infected leaves were detected 
using fluorescence spectra acquired by a 405 nm excitation laser. 
Asymptomatic leaves were identified 21 weeks before symptoms 
appeared on the leaves with an accuracy exceeding 90%.  
[140]  
 Sweet orange leaves  279.55 -285.21 nm, 315.89 -317.93 
nm, and 766.49 -769.90 nm  Laser -Induced 
Breakdown 
Spectroscopy  PCA and PLSR  Classification between healthy, HLB -asymptomatic, and HLB -
symptomatic leaves was achieved with an accuracy of 73% using 
the PLSR technique.  
[141]  Citrus leaves  620 nm  Fluorescence 
imaging 
spectroscopy  Random frog, sequential forward 
selection, and Monte Carlo 
uninformative variable 
elimination methods  Fluorescence images of healthy, HLB -infected, and nutrient 
deficient leaves were discriminated with an accuracy of 97% based 
on the combination of features and mean fluorescence.  24 
 
 [142]  Citrus plants (phloem tissues)  200-700 nm  Laser -induced 
breakdown 
spectroscopy  PCA  Classification accuracy of 88% or higher between healthy and 
HLB -affected plant phloem was achieved by applying PCA 
analysis to laser -induced breakdown spectra. The differences in the 
healthy and infected  spectra were attributed to the characteristic 
lines corresponding to elements such as calcium, sodium, nitrogen, 
hydrogen, and iron present in the phloem samples (excitation: 
Nd:YAG 1064 nm pulsed laser).  
[131]  
 Satsuma leaves  493 nm, 515 nm, 665 nm, 716 
nm, and 739 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging   LS-SVM  Three -class classification models and the LS -SVM classifier were 
used to classify between healthy, HLB -infected (asymptomatic and 
symptomatic), and nutrient -deficient leaves with accuracies of 
90.2%, 96.0%, and 92.6% for the cool season, hot season, and the 
entire period, respectively.  
[98] 
 Grapefruit and Mexican lime 
leaves  466 nm, 515/536 nm, 680 nm, 
730 nm and 780 nm  Synchronous 
fluorescence 
spectroscopy  PCA  The decrease in the chlorophyll bands and increase in blue -green 
region indicated the severity of citrus canker disease in leaves. 
Fluorescence spectra of healthy and asymptomatic leaves showed 
a high intensity of gallic acid and α -tocopherol, while symptomatic 
leaves exhibited a high intensity of caffeic acid, flavonoids, fla vins, 
tannins, and chlorogenic acid.  
[11]  Sugar Belle leaves  700-950 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging  k-NN The classification of citrus canker in asymptomatic, early 
symptomatic, and late symptomatic leaves showed accuracies of 
94%, 96%, and 100%, respectively.  25 
 
 [110]  
 Orange and grapefruit leaves  1180 cm−1, 1155 cm−1, 1329 
cm−1, 1455 cm−1, 1528 cm−1, and 
1604 cm−1 Raman 
spectroscopy  Orthogonal PLS discriminant 
analysis  Raman spectra acquired using an 831 nm excitation laser and a 
2mm beam size, have demonstrated detection rates of 
approximately 98% for grapefruit and approximately 87% for 
oranges when distinguishing between healthy, nutrient -deficient, 
and HLB -infected plant s. 
[114]  Navel orange leaves  614–1722 cm−1  (730–810 cm−1, 
866 cm−1, 942 cm−1, 1082 cm−1, 
1250 cm−1, 1455 cm−1, and 1510 –
1630 cm−1) Raman 
spectroscopy  PCA, PLS -DA, and BP -ANN  The study demonstrated the capability of the Raman method to 
identify the three types of carbohydrates - glucose, sucrose, and 
starch present in leaves in different health conditions of the HLB -
infected plant. The asymptomatic leaves exhibited relatively lower 
levels of carotene, sucrose, glucose, and chlorophyll in contrast to 
healthy leaves while an increase in the starch and polyphenol 
content were observed in asymptomatic conditions of the leaves  
[113]  
 Orange and grapefruit leaves  942-944 nm  Raman 
spectroscopy  Orthogonal PLS discriminant 
analysis  The findings of the work indicated that Raman spectroscopy (laser 
excitation 830 nm) has the potential for significantly more 
sensitive detection of HLB when compared to quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction.  
[35] Grapefruit leaves  530 nm, 686 nm and 735 nm  Fluorescence 
spectroscopy  PCA and PLSR  Detection of citrus canker in leaves based on the concentration of 
phenolic compounds, such as alkaloid berberine and quercetin, and 
observed chlorophyll using the fluorescence spectra.  
[129]  Citrus plant s (orchard)  468 nm, 504 nm, 512 nm, 516 
nm, 528 nm, 536 nm, 632 nm, 
680 nm, 688 nm, and 852 nm  Hyperspectral 
imaging  Quadratic SVM  UAV hyperspectral imaging was used to detect HLB disease on 
large -scale citrus orchard plant s and images were classified using 
a stacked autoencoder neural network with an accuracy of 99.33%.  26 
 
 [123]  
 Gannan navel orange leaves  5100 cm−1 and 6800 cm−1 LIBS -NIR 
spectroscopy  DA-PCA and MLP -PCA  The combination of LIBS and NIR achieved the highest diagnostic 
accuracy of 95.7% in detecting HLB. The findings indicated a 
significant decrease in the levels of minerals like zinc (Zn), 
magnesium (Mg), and calcium (Ca) in HLB -infected leaves, 
resulting in the appearance of yellow areas and spots. The LIBS –
NIR joint method was proposed as a better analytica l technique for 
identifying HLB in compared to using either LIBS or NIR 
individually.  
[111]  
 Grapefruit leaves  400 cm-1 - 2000 cm-1 (1525 cm–1, 
1575 cm–1, 1601 cm-1 and 1630 
cm-1) Raman 
spectroscopy  Kruskal -Wallis one -way analysis 
of variance  The analysis of Raman spectra indicated an increase in p-coumaric 
acid (1601 cm-1 and 1630 cm-1) content while a decrease in lutein 
(1525 cm-1) content in the HLB -infected leaves.  The results imply 
that Ca. L. asiaticus triggers a defence  response designed to 
eliminate the bacteria within the phloem.  
[59] 
 Orange leaves  1175 –900 cm−1, 1500 –1175 cm−1, 
and 1800 –1500 cm−1 Micro -FTIR 
spectroscopy  LS-SVR and RF  Micro -FTIR spectroscopy was utilized to estimate carbohydrate 
concentrations in the midribs of healthy, HLB -infected 
(symptomatic  and asymptomatic ), and nutrient -deficient plants 
using three fingerprint regions, specifically 1175 –900 cm−1, 1500 –
1175 cm−1, and 1800 –1500 cm−1. The spectral intensities of these 
peaks, as measured in HLB -asymptomatic and HLB -symptomatic 
leaves, were observed higher in comparison to the healthy and 
nutrient -deficient plants.  27 
 
 [130]  
 Lemon leaves  305nm –1090 nm  
(550 nm, 680 nm and 680 -750 
nm) Hyperspectral 
imaging  CARS and LS -SVM  The findings of the work indicated that hyperspectral imaging in 
the range of 305 -1090 nm combined with CARS and LS -SVM 
algorithm, offers an efficient way to assess the distribution  of 
chlorophyll  in CYVCV -infected lemon leaves, providing an 
enhanced understanding of the disease symptoms.  31 
 
 4. Limitations and Future Prospects  
The plant leaves have complex structures with multiple layers of cells, pigments, and other compounds. The absorption, 
scattering and penetration depth of light into the plant leaves might vary due to variations in the thickness of leaves, 
which consequently limits the technique to the measurement of surface properties of plant leaves. Thus, the technique 
might not represent the physiological status of the entire thickness of the leaf. However, the acquired surface properties 
might be sufficient in detecting the chemical or structural changes in leaves, which is not visible by eyes and might 
require a laboratory -based test. Although recent studies have indicated th at optical spectroscopy is rapid, label -free, 
non-destructive , and non -invasive  technique  that can be utilized directly in the field as screening tool to detect diseases 
in citrus plants, there are several challenges that exist in the commercialization of spectroscopic techniques. The 
environmental noises and high light intensities can affect t he measurement of the spectra. It is often needed to select an 
appropriate wavelength or index especially in case of NIRS that is not affected by the surrounding nois es in the 
environment. A single spectral measurement might not be sufficient for accurate detection of infected plants; therefore, 
multiple measurements from the same plant can enhance detection and classification accuracy. Furthermore, conducting 
multiple  measurements can additionally reduce the impact of daylight and other variations in ambient conditions (such 
as temperature, humidity, and air quality) on optical spectra, if present. A field -based portable or hand -held 
spectrometers might generate therma l noise and consequently degrade the quality of the spectra while operating 
continuously for a long time. Certain advanced equipment, particularly those which are still in the experimental stages, 
may necessitate a specialized or expensive instrumental set up. However, with advancements in optical and detector 
technologies, the incorporation of more machine learning -based algorithms or artificial intelligence -based software, and 
an increase in the number of users, the cost reduction is highly expected in nea r future.  
Among the array of nondestructive and rapid assessments techniques and tools employed for quality assessment, NIR 
spectroscopy stands as a relatively more established option in terms of its instrumentation, compatible accessories and 
its suitability with r eadily available chemometric packages. NIRS exhibits a fairly high degree of ruggedness. However, 
the robustness of the technique relies on several factors including the sensitivity of the sensor employed. Although 
numerous investigations have demonstrated  promising results when utilizing the NIR spectroscopy method to detect 
and discriminate diseases in plants, it is imperative to exercise prudence in analysis of associated spectral data. This is 
due to the fact that absorption bands in NIR spectral data are typically broad and are often subject to interference 
resulting from overlapping absorptions. This interference primarily attributed to overtones and combinations of 
vibrational modes involved in various chemical bonds such as N –H, O –H, C –H, and S –H. Another major challenge 
encountered in NIR spectroscopy -based method is due to the intrinsic variability in plant leaves. Consequently, disparate 
NIR configurations and analytical frameworks have been employed in pursuit of enhanced predictive capabilities. 32 
 
 However, it is essential to acknowledge that the selection of these parameters can exert a tangible influence on both the 
accuracy and robustness of the predictive models. Therefore, it is of one of the major challenges in the NIRS is to select, 
optimize a nd standardize the settings and analytical framework to acquire best results with higher accuracy and make it 
more viable for agri -commercial application. Another issue associated with NIRS technology involves the necessity for 
a calibration step for every  new set of measurements. The challenge could be mitigated by automating this process using 
a standard material. The approach has begun to be incorporated into portable and handheld devices in manual 
measurements.  However, implementation of such approach with UAV based measurements might be challenging. 
Creating and maintaining extensive spectral libraries encompassing various citrus plant species under diverse conditions 
and geographical locations, demands substantial resources and time. The existence of such spectral libraries can enhance 
the practicality of NIRS models in precision agriculture.  
Fluorescence spectroscopy is another major optical tool in plant spectroscopy, offering insights into the molecular 
composition and physiological status of plants. However, the intricate structures of plant tissues, encompassing 
nonuniform cell walls, pigm ents, and heterogeneous fluorophore distribution present challenges to the technique that 
can compromise the precision and interpretation of fluorescence signals. Environmental factors such as ambient 
temperature,  light intensity,  and humidity can also influence fluorescence signals, making it challenging to obtain 
consistent results across different experimental conditions. Photobleaching is one of the major limitations of the method 
in which exposure of laser light leads to the d egradation of the fluorophore and results in the loss of its ability to fluoresce 
and, consequently the loss in fluorescence signal is encountered. It reduces the sensitivity and accuracy in recording of 
the spectrum from the leaf sample. Photoquenching mi ght also cause the reduction in the fluorescence intensity of 
fluorescent molecules under high -intensity light exposure, but at the same time it also offers an additional viable 
approach for investigating the dynamics of endogenous fluorophores and their i nteractions within the local environment 
of plant tissue. The photobleaching may be overcome by adjusting the intensity and duration of exposure of light  and 
selecting longer excitation wavelengths whenever possible. While longer excitation wavelengths can  reduce 
photobleaching, it might also contribute in less efficient excitation of certain fluorophores. Therefore, the selection of 
excitation wavelength needs a balance between minimizing photobleaching and effectively exciting the target 
fluorophores of i nterest. Different citrus plants and species might have varying fluorophores and susceptibilities to 
photoquenching and photobleaching, necessitating customized optimization of methods and protocols.  
Raman spectroscopy offers numerous advantages when compared to other spectroscopic techniques specially for 
measurement of plant leaves. It has the capability to accurately identify bio -compositional changes by attributing distinct 
fingerprint characterist ic peaks, which aids in uncovering the underlying mechanisms associated with the detection and 
progression of plant disease.  In general, Raman scattering cross -section is relatively low that can limit the sensitivity 33 
 
 of the technique for the analytes with low concentrations available in the sample volume. Raman spectroscopy is 
susceptible to endogenous fluorescence present in plant leaves and can interfere with the Raman signal. Sometimes the 
fluorescence caused by imp urities present in the sample or by the excitation wavelength can mask the Raman signals. 
The spectral resolution of Raman spectroscopy is limited by the spectral width of the laser source used and might makes 
it difficult to resolve closely spaced spectra l features. Moreover, the prolonged exposure of the high -power laser during 
data acquisition on the plant samples may damage or alter the compositions of the plant tissues. One of the primary 
challenges in citrus diseases lies in distinguishing between bio tic factors (typically caused by pathogenic infections) and 
abiotic stressors (usually resulting from unfavourable  environmental conditions, including nutrient deficiencies) 
because these two factors might manifest as similar visible symptoms. Raman -based technique has high potential to 
differentiate such stressors in plants, especially when applied in the field conditions. The alterations in metabolic factors 
indicate that plants responding to both biotic and abiotic stresses utilize distinct regulatory mechanisms to enhance their 
resistance to stress. Therefore, conducting specific assessments of the diverse chemical compositions, which contribute 
to inducing a specific  phenotype in citrus plants, can significantly enhance the practical utility of the tech nique in the 
near future.  
Hyperspectral imaging is an expensive and powerful imaging technique that can capture the detailed spectral 
information about the composition and properties of objects. The images encompass a large  amount  data and require 
significant processing power and storage space to handle. This makes it difficult to analyze large datasets in real -time. 
Typically, a standard hyperspectral image often sacrifices spatial resolution for spectral information. A lower spat ial 
resolution in comparison to conventional color i mage can limit the ability to resolve small features in a field -of-view of 
a plant. The image can be sensitive to environmental or atmospheric conditions, which can affect the quality of the data. 
Another challenge is that hyperspectral imaging typically h as a limited field -of-view, which can make it challenging to 
capture data over a large area. The spectral response of different plants can vary depending on the number of factors 
such as lighting conditions or surface orientation. This can make it challeng ing to accurately identify or classify the 
plants based on their spectral signature. Additionally, there is a need for systematic comparisons between leaf -scale and 
canopy -scale detection methods and the severity of citrus disease infestations using the te chnique of hyperspectral 
imaging. The inclusion of both types of data can enhance the variability of the dataset, the robustness of the model, and 
consequently, the usefulness of the method.  
Optical spectroscopic techniques are label -free, non -destructive and more accurate in early and rapid detection of 
diseases and enable us to use them as a large -scale screening tool for citrus diseases. Over the past decade, there has 
been an increase in academic research focused on utilizing spectroscopic techniques for identifying diseases in citrus 
plants. Plant disease identification is an important part of crop plant management in agriculture and horticulture. In the 34 
 
 case of citrus disease infections, the pathogen can remain in a latent form inside the plant. However, the timing and 
extent of its activity can vary, making it challenging to predict when symptoms will become visible. This variability not 
only makes manag ing citrus diseases, including HLB, difficult but also offers an excellent opportunity for the 
development and advancement of optical spectroscopy -based biophotonics tools and sensors. Another challenge that 
still needs to be addressed is the scenario in w hich infestations of more than one disease, also known as multiple disease 
complexes or co -infections, exist in a plant, presenting a significant challenge in detection. The capability of early 
detection of stress and infections using the light -based spect roscopic tools is advantageous for farmers, producers and 
horticulturist as it enables prompt intervention to prevent and early control the spread of infection and consequently 
minimize the loss and degradation in citrus quality. Thus, the information obta ined from spectroscopy can be used to 
make management decisions, including the implementation of suitable control measures to minimize the impact of 
various diseases on citrus plants.  
Advances in light sources, detector technologies, chemometrics and image processing methods will improve the ability 
of optics -based methods to diagnose citrus diseases and will support to ensure a better future for the citrus farming and 
precision agricul ture. An integration of spectroscopic techniques with artificial learning algorithms opens a new field 
of study to rapidly detect diseases in citrus plants on an agro -industrial and commercial scale. These rapid, label -free 
and portable spectroscopic techn iques could potentially be utilized on a large scale in agriculture technology to detect 
citrus disease at an initial  growth stage. Furthermore, the integration of optical spectroscopic techniques with omics 
technologies, such as transcriptomics, metabolomics,  and genomics  in association with a big data analysis approach, 
can provide a holistic view of citrus disease initiation and progression in plants. This approach can elucidate complex 
plant response to environmental changes and stressors in a better wa y. Moreover, when employing a multimodal 
approach for analysis, it is imperative to explore the alterations in substances during the development of citrus diseases 
and determine which substances play the most significant role in diagnosing citrus diseases.  
 
Funding:  This research was supported by the Science and Engineering Research Board (grant number 
SRG/2020/00220) and,  Ramalingaswami Re -entry Fellowship,  Department of Biotechnology, Government of India  
 
Conflicts of interest/Competing interests : The authors declare no conflict of interest.  
 
Data availability : None
  
 
       References  
1. Da Graça, J. and L. Korsten, Citrus huanglongbing: Review, present status and future strategies.  
Diseases of Fruits and Vegetables Volume I: Diagnosis and Management, 2004: p. 229 -245.  
2. Kustrzeba -Wójcicka, I., et al., Alternaria alternata and its allergens: a comprehensive review.  
Clinical reviews in allergy & immunology, 2014. 47: p. 354 -365.  
3. Rhaiem, A. and P.W. Taylor, Colletotrichum gloeosporioides associated with anthracnose 
symptoms on citrus, a new report for Tunisia.  European Journal of Plant Pathology, 2016. 146: 
p. 219 -224.  
4. Mabbett, T. and R. Phelps, The behaviour of copper deposits from reduced‐volume sprays and 
their control of citrus greasy spot.  1983.  
5. Xuan, Z., et al., Complete genome sequence of citrus yellow spot virus, a newly discovered 
member of the family Betaflexiviridae.  Archives of virology, 2020. 165: p. 2709 -2713.  
6. Behlau, F., An overview of citrus canker in Brazil.  Tropical Plant Pathology, 2021. 46(1): p. 1 -
12. 
7. do Brasil Cardinali, M.C., et al., Infrared spectroscopy: a potential tool in huanglongbing and 
citrus variegated chlorosis diagnosis.  Talanta, 2012. 91: p. 1 -6. 
8. Munir, S., et al., Huanglongbing control: perhaps the end of the beginning.  Microbial Ecology, 
2018. 76: p. 192 -204.  
9. Hu, B., et al., Molecular signatures between citrus and Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.  PLoS 
Pathogens, 2021. 17(12): p. e1010071.  
10. Laranjeira, F.F., et al., Spatiotemporal dynamics and modelling support the case for area‐wide 
management of citrus greasy spot in a Brazilian smallholder farming region.  Plant Pathology, 
2020. 69(3): p. 467 -483.  
11. Abdulridha, J., O. Batuman, and Y. Ampatzidis, UAV -based remote sensing technique to detect 
citrus canker disease utilizing hyperspectral imaging and machine learning.  Remote Sensing, 
2019. 11(11): p. 1373.  
12. O’Brien, P.A., Biological control of plant diseases.  Australasian Plant Pathology, 2017. 46: p. 
293-304.  
13. Gessner, M.O. and A.L. Schmitt, Use of solid -phase extraction to determine ergosterol 
concentrations in plant tissue colonized by fungi.  Applied and environmental microbiology, 
1996. 62(2): p. 415 -419.  
14. Balijja, A., A. Kvarnheden, and T. Turchetti, A non -phenol –chloroform extraction of double -
stranded RNA from plant and fungal tissues.  Journal of virological methods, 2008. 152(1-2): p. 
32-37. 
15. Katalinic, V., et al., Phenolic profile, antioxidant capacity, and antimicrobial activity of leaf 
extracts from six Vitis vinifera L. varieties.  International journal of food properties, 2013. 16(1): 
p. 45 -60. 
16. HwangBo, K., et al., Rapid and simple method for DNA extraction from plant and algal species 
suitable for PCR amplification using a chelating resin Chelex 100.  Plant Biotechnology Reports, 
2010. 4: p. 49 -52. 
17. Card, D.H., et al., Prediction of leaf chemistry by the use of visible and near infrared reflectance 
spectroscopy.  Remote Sensing of Environment, 1988. 26(2): p. 123 -147.  
18. Xu, H., et al., Near -infrared spectroscopy in detecting leaf miner damage on tomato leaf.  
Biosystems Engineering, 2007. 96(4): p. 447 -454.  
19. Curran, P.J., et al., Reflectance spectroscopy of fresh whole leaves for the estimation of 
chemical concentration.  Remote Sensing of Environment, 1992. 39(2): p. 153 -166.  
20. Petit Bon, M., et al., One leaf for all: Chemical traits of single leaves measured at the leaf 
surface using near‐infrared reflectance spectroscopy.  Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 2020. 
11(9): p. 1061 -1071.   
 
 21. Maxwell, K. and G.N. Johnson, Chlorophyll fluorescence —a practical guide.  Journal of 
experimental botany, 2000. 51(345): p. 659 -668.  
22. Buitrago, M.F., et al., Spectroscopic determination of leaf traits using infrared spectra.  
International journal of applied earth observation and geoinformation, 2018. 69: p. 237 -250.  
23. Gandolfo, D., et al., Fourier transform infra -red spectroscopy using an attenuated total 
reflection probe to distinguish between Japanese larch, pine and citrus plants in healthy and 
diseased states.  Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 2016. 
163: p. 181 -188.  
24. Pereira, F.M.V., et al., Laser -induced fluorescence imaging method to monitor citrus greening 
disease.  Computers and electronics in agriculture, 2011. 79(1): p. 90 -93. 
25. Weng, S., et al., Advanced application of Raman spectroscopy and surface -enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy in plant disease diagnostics: a review.  Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 2021. 69(10): p. 2950 -2964.  
26. Bachmann, L., et al., Fluorescence spectroscopy of biological tissues —a review.  Applied 
Spectroscopy Reviews, 2006. 41(6): p. 575 -590.  
27. Sankaran, S. and R. Ehsani, Detection of huanglongbing disease in citrus using fluorescence 
spectroscopy.  Transactions of the ASABE, 2012. 55(1): p. 313 -320.  
28. Hawkins, S.A., et al., Comparison of FTIR spectra between huanglongbing (citrus greening) and 
other citrus maladies.  Journal of agricultural and food chemistry, 2010. 58(10): p. 6007 -6010.  
29. Mahesh, S., et al., Hyperspectral imaging to classify and monitor quality of agricultural 
materials.  Journal of Stored Products Research, 2015. 61: p. 17 -26. 
30. Meza Ramirez, C.A., et al., Applications of machine learning in spectroscopy.  Applied 
Spectroscopy Reviews, 2021. 56(8-10): p. 733 -763.  
31. Elaraby, A., W. Hamdy, and S. Alanazi, Classification of citrus diseases using optimization deep 
learning approach.  Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2022. 2022 . 
32. Ghosh, K., et al., Deep learning spectroscopy: Neural networks for molecular excitation 
spectra.  Advanced science, 2019. 6(9): p. 1801367.  
33. Moerner, W. and D.P. Fromm, Methods of single -molecule fluorescence spectroscopy and 
microscopy.  Review of Scientific instruments, 2003. 74(8): p. 3597 -3619.  
34. Vitelli, M., et al., Rapid and non -destructive determination of protein and starch content in 
agricultural powders using near -infrared and fluorescence spectroscopy, and data fusion.  
Powder Technology, 2021. 381: p. 620 -631.  
35. Saleem, M., et al., Laser -induced fluorescence spectroscopy for early disease detection in 
grapefruit plants.  Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 2020. 19: p. 713 -721.  
36. Wetterich, C.B., et al., Detection of citrus canker and Huanglongbing using fluorescence 
imaging spectroscopy and support vector machine technique.  Applied optics, 2016. 55(2): p. 
400-407.  
37. Wetterich, C.B., et al., Detection of Huanglongbing in Florida using fluorescence imaging 
spectroscopy and machine -learning methods.  Applied Optics, 2017. 56(1): p. 15 -23. 
38. Boens, N., et al., Fluorescence lifetime standards for time and frequency domain fluorescence 
spectroscopy.  Analytical chemistry, 2007. 79(5): p. 2137 -2149.  
39. Zhu, X., et al., Technical development of Raman spectroscopy: from instrumental to advanced 
combined technologies.  Applied Spectroscopy Reviews, 2014. 49(1): p. 64 -82. 
40. Yang, D. and Y. Ying, Applications of Raman spectroscopy in agricultural products and food 
analysis: A review.  Applied Spectroscopy Reviews, 2011. 46(7): p. 539 -560.  
41. Guo, Z., et al., Detection of heavy metals in food and agricultural products by surface -enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy.  Food Reviews International, 2023. 39(3): p. 1440 -1461.  
42. Weng, S., et al., Recent advances in Raman technology with applications in agriculture, food 
and biosystems: A review.  Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture, 2019. 3: p. 1 -10. 
43. Pence, I. and A. Mahadevan -Jansen, Clinical instrumentation and applications of Raman 
spectroscopy.  Chemical Society Reviews, 2016. 45(7): p. 1958 -1979.   
 
 44. Cortez -Valadez, M., et al., Green synthesis up to geometric gold microparticles.  Journal of 
Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers and Materials, 2021. 31: p. 1079 -1085.  
45. Nekvapil, F., et al., Citrus fruits freshness assessment using Raman spectroscopy.  Food 
chemistry, 2018. 242: p. 560 -567.  
46. Cai, J., et al., Characterization and recognition of citrus fruit spoilage fungi using Raman 
scattering spectroscopic imaging.  Vibrational Spectroscopy, 2023. 124: p. 103474.  
47. Liu, Y., et al., Diagnosis of citrus greening using raman spectroscopy -based pattern recognition.  
Journal of Applied Spectroscopy, 2020. 87: p. 150 -158.  
48. Müller, C., et al., Detection of thiabendazole applied on citrus fruits and bananas using surface 
enhanced Raman scattering.  Food chemistry, 2014. 145: p. 814 -820.  
49. Zhang, J., et al., Nanostructured WO3 photoanodes for efficient water splitting via anodisation 
in citric acid.  RSC advances, 2017. 7(56): p. 35221 -35227.  
50. Soul, J.S. and A.J. du Plessis. Near -infrared spectroscopy . in Seminars in Pediatric Neurology . 
1999. Elsevier.  
51. Ozaki, Y., Infrared spectroscopy —Mid-infrared, near -infrared, and far -infrared/terahertz 
spectroscopy.  Analytical Sciences, 2021. 37(9): p. 1193 -1212.  
52. Beć, K.B., J. Grabska, and C.W. Huck, Biomolecular and bioanalytical applications of infrared 
spectroscopy –A review.  Analytica chimica acta, 2020. 1133 : p. 150 -177.  
53. Kalashnikov, D.A., et al., Infrared spectroscopy with visible light.  Nature Photonics, 2016. 
10(2): p. 98 -101.  
54. Sankaran, S., R. Ehsani, and E. Etxeberria, Mid-infrared spectroscopy for detection of 
Huanglongbing (greening) in citrus leaves.  Talanta, 2010. 83(2): p. 574 -581.  
55. Ali, M.M., et al., Non-destructive techniques of detecting plant diseases: A review.  
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology, 2019. 108: p. 101426.  
56. Aronoff, S., The absorption spectra of chlorophyll and related compounds.  Chemical reviews, 
1950. 47(2): p. 175 -195.  
57. Zahir, S.A.D.M., et al., A review of visible and near -infrared (Vis -NIR) spectroscopy application 
in plant stress detection.  Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 2022. 338: p. 113468.  
58. Mishra, A., et al., Evaluation of an active optical sensor for detection of Huanglongbing (HLB) 
disease.  biosystems engineering, 2011. 110(3): p. 302 -309.  
59. Yang, B., et al., Citrus Huanglongbing detection and semi -quantification of the carbohydrate 
concentration based on micro -FTIR spectroscopy.  Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2022. 
414(23): p. 6881 -6897.  
60. Zang, Z., et al., Terahertz spectroscopic monitoring and analysis of citrus leaf water status 
under low temperature stress.  Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 2023. 194: p. 52 -59. 
61. Sarkar, C., et al., Leaf disease detection using machine learning and deep learning: Review and 
challenges.  Applied Soft Computing, 2023: p. 110534.  
62. Sujatha, R., et al., Performance of deep learning vs machine learning in plant leaf disease 
detection.  Microprocessors and Microsystems, 2021. 80: p. 103615.  
63. Grosser, J. and H. Haberland, Reactive scattering of hydrogen and deuterium atoms from 
halogen molecules.  Chemical Physics, 1973. 2(3): p. 342 -351.  
64. Furfari, F., A different kind of chemistry: a history of tungsten halogen lamps.  IEEE Industry 
Applications Magazine, 2001. 7(6): p. 10 -17. 
65. Jenkins, R., et al., Energy efficiency of a quartz tungsten halogen lamp: Experimental and 
numerical approach.  Thermal Science and Engineering Progress, 2019. 13: p. 100385.  
66. Finkenzeller, U., Deuterium lamp as a UV continuum source from 160 nm to 320 nm for space 
applications.  Applied Optics, 1979. 18(23): p. 3938 -3941.  
67. Sperfeld, P., et al., Characterization and use of deuterium lamps as transfer standards of 
spectral irradiance.  Metrologia, 2003. 40(1): p. S111.  
68. Williamson, J.M., R.J. Bowling, and R.L. McCreery, Near -infrared Raman spectroscopy with a 
783-nm diode laser and CCD array detector.  Applied Spectroscopy, 1989. 43(3): p. 372 -375.   
 
 69. Seok, E., et al., Progress and challenges towards terahertz CMOS integrated circuits.  IEEE 
Journal of Solid -State Circuits, 2010. 45(8): p. 1554 -1564.  
70. Ali, S.Z., et al., A low -power, low -cost infra -red emitter in CMOS technology.  IEEE Sensors 
Journal, 2015. 15(12): p. 6775 -6782.  
71. Kang, S., et al. Chip -scale mems -cmos multispectral infrared chemical sensor . in 2019 IEEE 32nd 
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) . 2019. IEEE.  
72. Liland, K.H., T. Almøy, and B. -H. Mevik, Optimal choice of baseline correction for multivariate 
calibration of spectra.  Applied spectroscopy, 2010. 64(9): p. 1007 -1016.  
73. Liu, J., et al., Goldindec: a novel algorithm for Raman spectrum baseline correction.  Applied 
spectroscopy, 2015. 69(7): p. 834 -842.  
74. Barnes, R., M.S. Dhanoa, and S.J. Lister, Standard normal variate transformation and de -
trending of near -infrared diffuse reflectance spectra.  Applied spectroscopy, 1989. 43(5): p. 
772-777.  
75. Zimmermann, B. and A. Kohler, Optimizing Savitzky –Golay Parameters for Improving Spectral 
Resolution and Quantification in Infrared Spectroscopy.  Applied Spectroscopy, 2013. 67(8): p. 
892-902.  
76. Helland, I.S., T. Næs, and T. Isaksson, Related versions of the multiplicative scatter correction 
method for preprocessing spectroscopic data.  Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory 
Systems, 1995. 29(2): p. 233 -241.  
77. Isaksson, T. and T. Næs, The effect of multiplicative scatter correction (MSC) and linearity 
improvement in NIR spectroscopy.  Applied Spectroscopy, 1988. 42(7): p. 1273 -1284.  
78. Okamoto, H. and W.S. Lee, Green citrus detection using hyperspectral imaging.  Computers 
and electronics in agriculture, 2009. 66(2): p. 201 -208.  
79. Windrim, L., et al., A physics -based deep learning approach to shadow invariant 
representations of hyperspectral images.  IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2017. 27(2): 
p. 665 -677.  
80. Xie, H., et al., Dual camera snapshot hyperspectral imaging system via physics -informed 
learning.  Optics and Lasers in Engineering, 2022. 154: p. 107023.  
81. Chen, J., et al., Integration of physics -based and data -driven models for hyperspectral image 
unmixing: A summary of current methods.  IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2023. 40(2): p. 61 -
74. 
82. Asner, G.P., et al., Carnegie airborne observatory: in -flight fusion of hyperspectral imaging and 
waveform light detection and ranging for three -dimensional studies of ecosystems.  Journal of 
Applied Remote Sensing, 2007. 1(1): p. 013536.  
83. Fischer, C. and I. Kakoulli, Multispectral and hyperspectral imaging technologies in 
conservation: current research and potential applications.  Studies in Conservation, 2006. 
51(sup1): p. 3 -16. 
84. Kamruzzaman, M. and D. -W. Sun, Introduction to hyperspectral imaging technology , in 
Computer vision technology for food quality evaluation . 2016, Elsevier. p. 111 -139.  
85. Iqbal, A., D. -W. Sun, and P. Allen, An overview on principle, techniques and application of 
hyperspectral imaging with special reference to ham quality evaluation and control.  Food 
Control, 2014. 46: p. 242 -254.  
86. Wu, D. and D. -W. Sun, Advanced applications of hyperspectral imaging technology for food 
quality and safety analysis and assessment: A review —Part I: Fundamentals.  Innovative Food 
Science & Emerging Technologies, 2013. 19: p. 1 -14. 
87. Lodhi, V., D. Chakravarty, and P. Mitra, Hyperspectral imaging system: Development aspects 
and recent trends.  Sensing and Imaging, 2019. 20: p. 1 -24. 
88. Liu, D., X. -A. Zeng, and D. -W. Sun, Recent developments and applications of hyperspectral 
imaging for quality evaluation of agricultural products: a review.  Critical reviews in food 
science and nutrition, 2015. 55(12): p. 1744 -1757.   
 
 89. Qin, J., Hyperspectral imaging instruments , in Hyperspectral imaging for food quality analysis 
and control . 2010, Elsevier. p. 129 -172.  
90. Dhanoa, M., et al., The link between multiplicative scatter correction (MSC) and standard 
normal variate (SNV) transformations of NIR spectra.  Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy, 
1994. 2(1): p. 43 -47. 
91. Farber, C., et al., Advanced spectroscopic techniques for plant disease diagnostics. A review.  
TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 2019. 118: p. 43 -49. 
92. Elmasry, G., et al., Principles and applications of hyperspectral imaging in quality evaluation 
of agro -food products: a review.  Critical reviews in food science and nutrition, 2012. 52(11): 
p. 999 -1023.  
93. Khaled, A.Y., et al., Early detection of diseases in plant tissue using spectroscopy –applications 
and limitations.  Applied Spectroscopy Reviews, 2018. 53(1): p. 36 -64. 
94. Lins, E., J. Belasque Jr, and L.G. Marcassa, Optical fiber laser induced fluorescence spectroscopy 
as a citrus canker diagnostic.  Applied Optics, 2010. 49(4): p. 663 -667.  
95. Sankaran, S. and R. Ehsani, Detection of huanglongbing -infected citrus leaves using statistical 
models with a fluorescence sensor.  Applied spectroscopy, 2013. 67(4): p. 463 -469.  
96. Belasque Jr, J., M. Gasparoto, and L.G. Marcassa, Detection of mechanical and disease stresses 
in citrus plants by fluorescence spectroscopy.  Applied Optics, 2008. 47(11): p. 1922 -1926.  
97. Lins, E.C., J. Belasque, and L.G. Marcassa, Detection of citrus canker in citrus plants using laser 
induced fluorescence spectroscopy.  Precision Agriculture, 2009. 10: p. 319 -330.  
98. Atta, B.M., et al., Synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy for early diagnosis of citrus canker in 
citrus species.  Laser Physics, 2019. 29(8): p. 085604.  
99. Rimington, C., Spectral -absorption coefficients of some porphyrins in the Soret -band region.  
Biochemical Journal, 1960. 75(3): p. 620.  
100.  Yoshioka, M. and Y. Yamamoto, Quality control of Photosystem II: where and how does the 
degradation of the D1 protein by FtsH proteases start under light stress? –Facts and 
hypotheses.  Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology B: Biology, 2011. 104(1-2): p. 229 -
235.  
101.  Yamamoto, Y., et al., Quality control of photosystem II: impact of light and heat stresses.  
Photosynthesis research, 2008. 98: p. 589 -608.  
102.  Klug, D., et al., Energy transfer to low energy chlorophyll species prior to trapping by P700 and 
subsequent electron transfer.  Photosynthesis research, 1989. 22: p. 277 -284.  
103.  Shiozawa, J.A., R.S. Alberte, and J.P. Thornber, The P700 -chlorophyll a -protein: isolation and 
some characteristics of the complex in higher plants.  Archives of biochemistry and biophysics, 
1974. 165(1): p. 388 -397.  
104.  Alam, F., et al., Citrus flavonoids as potential therapeutic agents: A review.  Phytotherapy 
Research, 2022. 36(4): p. 1417 -1441.  
105.  Kawaii, S., et al., Quantitative study of flavonoids in leaves of Citrus plants.  Journal of 
agricultural and food chemistry, 2000. 48(9): p. 3865 -3871.  
106.  Zhao, C., et al., Biosynthesis of citrus flavonoids and their health effects.  Critical reviews in food 
science and nutrition, 2020. 60(4): p. 566 -583.  
107.  Chen, Y., et al., Evaluation of phenolic composition and antioxidant properties of different 
varieties of Chinese citrus.  Food Chemistry, 2021. 364: p. 130413.  
108.  M’hiri, N., et al., Extraction methods of citrus peel phenolic compounds.  Food Reviews 
International, 2014. 30(4): p. 265 -290.  
109.  Torikai, A., T. Hattori, and T. Eguchi, Wavelength effect on the photoinduced reaction of 
polymethylmethacrylate.  Journal of Polymer Science Part A: Polymer Chemistry, 1995. 33(11): 
p. 1867 -1871.  
110.  Sanchez, L., et al., Rapid and noninvasive diagnostics of Huanglongbing and nutrient deficits 
on citrus trees with a handheld Raman spectrometer.  Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry, 
2019. 411: p. 3125 -3133.   
 
 111.  Dou, T., et al., Biochemical origin of raman -based diagnostics of huanglongbing in grapefruit 
trees.  Frontiers in Plant Science, 2021. 12: p. 680991.  
112.  Pérez, M.R.V., et al., Raman spectroscopy an option for the early detection of citrus 
Huanglongbing.  Applied Spectroscopy, 2016. 70(5): p. 829 -839.  
113.  Sanchez, L., et al., Raman spectroscopy vs quantitative polymerase chain reaction in early 
stage Huanglongbing diagnostics.  Scientific Reports, 2020. 10(1): p. 10101.  
114.  Wang, K., et al., The early, rapid, and non -destructive detection of citrus Huanglongbing (HLB) 
based on microscopic confocal Raman.  Food Analytical Methods, 2019. 12: p. 2500 -2508.  
115.  Sanchez, L., et al., Detection and identification of canker and blight on orange trees using a 
hand‐held Raman spectrometer.  Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, 2019. 50(12): p. 1875 -1880.  
116.  Zheng, G., et al., Identification and determination of chemical constituents of Citrus reticulata 
semen through ultra high performance liquid chromatography combined with Q Exactive 
Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry.  Journal of separation science, 2020. 43(2): p. 438 -451.  
117.  Zhang, Y., et al., Plant disease monitoring with vibrational spectroscopy , in Comprehensive 
Analytical Chemistry . 2018, Elsevier. p. 227 -251.  
118.  Kumar, S., et al., Infrared spectroscopy combined with imaging: A new developing analytical 
tool in health and plant science.  Applied Spectroscopy Reviews, 2016. 51(6): p. 466 -483.  
119.  Ghanei Ghooshkhaneh, N. and K. Mollazade, Optical techniques for fungal disease detection 
in citrus fruit: a review.  Food and Bioprocess Technology, 2023: p. 1 -22. 
120.  Sylvain, T. and L. -G. Cecile, Disease identification: a review of vibrational spectroscopy 
applications.  Comprehensive analytical chemistry, 2018. 80: p. 195 -225.  
121.  Sankaran, S., et al., Visible -near infrared spectroscopy for detection of Huanglongbing in citrus 
orchards.  Computers and electronics in agriculture, 2011. 77(2): p. 127 -134.  
122.  Magwaza, L.S., et al., NIR spectroscopy applications for internal and external quality analysis 
of citrus fruit —a review.  Food and Bioprocess Technology, 2012. 5: p. 425 -444.  
123.  Xu, F., et al., Comparative identification of citrus huanglongbing by analyzing leaves using 
laser -induced breakdown spectroscopy and near -infrared spectroscopy.  Applied Physics B, 
2020. 126: p. 1 -7. 
124.  Li, J., X. Rao, and Y. Ying, Development of algorithms for detecting citrus canker based on 
hyperspectral reflectance imaging.  Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 2012. 92(1): 
p. 125 -134.  
125.  Li, H., et al., ‘Extended spectral angle mapping (ESAM)’for citrus greening disease detection 
using airborne hyperspectral imaging.  Precision Agriculture, 2014. 15: p. 162 -183.  
126.  Qin, J., et al., Detection of citrus canker using hyperspectral reflectance imaging with spectral 
information divergence.  Journal of food engineering, 2009. 93(2): p. 183 -191.  
127.  Zhao, X., et al., Effect of fruit harvest time on citrus canker detection using hyperspectral 
reflectance imaging.  Sensing and Instrumentation for Food Quality and Safety, 2010. 4: p. 126 -
135.  
128.  Qin, J., et al., Citrus canker detection using hyperspectral reflectance imaging and PCA -based 
image classification method.  Sensing and Instrumentation for Food Quality and Safety, 2008. 
2: p. 168 -177.  
129.  Deng, X., et al., Detection of citrus huanglongbing based on multi -input neural network model 
of UAV hyperspectral remote sensing.  Remote Sensing, 2020. 12(17): p. 2678.  
130.  Li, X., et al., Estimating the distribution of chlorophyll content in CYVCV infected lemon leaf 
using hyperspectral imaging.  Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2022. 198: p. 107036.  
131.  Weng, H., et al., Hyperspectral reflectance imaging combined with carbohydrate metabolism 
analysis for diagnosis of citrus Huanglongbing in different seasons and cultivars.  Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical, 2018. 275: p. 50 -60. 
132.  Xiaoling, D., et al., Detection of citrus Huanglongbing based on image feature extraction and 
two-stage BPNN modeling.  International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, 
2016. 9(6): p. 20 -26.  
 
 133.  Gonzalez -Gonzalez, M.G., et al., Automated Detection of Tetranychus urticae Koch in Citrus 
Leaves Based on Colour and VIS/NIR Hyperspectral Imaging.  Agronomy, 2021. 11(5): p. 1002.  
134.  Garcia -Ruiz, F., et al., Comparison of two aerial imaging platforms for identification of 
Huanglongbing -infected citrus trees.  Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2013. 91: p. 
106-115.  
135.  Costa, L., et al., Determining leaf nutrient concentrations in citrus trees using UAV imagery and 
machine learning.  Precision agriculture, 2022: p. 1 -22. 
136.  Marcassa, L.G., et al., Fluorescence spectroscopy applied to orange trees.  Laser physics, 2006. 
16: p. 884 -888.  
137.  Hawkins, S.A., et al., Detection of citrus huanglongbing by fourier transform infrared —
attenuated total reflection spectroscopy.  Applied spectroscopy, 2010. 64(1): p. 100 -103.  
138.  Sankaran, S., R. Ehsani, and K.T. Morganc, Detection of anomalies in citrus leaves using laser -
induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS).  Applied spectroscopy, 2015. 69(8): p. 913 -919.  
139.  Ranulfi, A.C., et al., Laser -induced fluorescence spectroscopy applied to early diagnosis of citrus 
Huanglongbing.  biosystems engineering, 2016. 144: p. 133 -144.  
140.  Ranulfi, A.C., et al., Evaluation of the nutritional changes caused by Huanglongbing (HLB) to 
citrus plants using laser -induced breakdown spectroscopy.  Applied Spectroscopy, 2017. 71(7): 
p. 1471 -1480.  
141.  Cen, H., et al., Chlorophyll fluorescence imaging uncovers photosynthetic fingerprint of citrus 
Huanglongbing.  Frontiers in plant science, 2017. 8: p. 1509.  
142.  Ponce, L., et al., Rapid identification of Huanlongbing -infected citrus plants using laser -induced 
breakdown spectroscopy of phloem samples.  Applied Optics, 2018. 57(30): p. 8841 -8844.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Symptoms of citrus canker and HLB infection in leaves and fruits. (a) The lesions associated with citrus canker exhibi t a round or oval 
shape, featuring a distinctive raised center surrounded by a water -soaked margin. (b) The HLB infection demonstrates  the symptoms such as 
yellowing of leaf veins with blotchy mottling, as well as lopsided, underdeveloped and premature drop of the fruit.  
 
 
 
Fig. 2  A schematic diagram of hyperspectral camera and indoor set -up to capture hyperspectral image of a leaf.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 The generalized hyperspectral workflow encompasses various steps, starting from the acquisition of hyperspectral images to th e 
identification of regions of interest in the captured images.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 The f luorescence spectra were measured from the  adaxial surface of healthy and HLB -infected citrus  leaves  using a 405 nm  excitation  
laser . 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Raman spectra of healthy and  HLB -infected (asymptomatic and symptomatic) citrus leaves [114]  [reprinted and adapted with 
permission].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Fig. 6 A typical NIR reflectance spectra of a leaf  (adaxial surface).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 The FTIR spectra of (a) HLB negative and (b) HLB positive citrus leaves [28] [reprinted  and adapted  with permission].  
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                         (a)                                           (b) 
Fig. 8 Reflectance spectra of healthy and citrus canker infected plants acquired from UAV -based hyperspectral imaging system. The 
hyperspectral data collection system utilizing UAV technology captures images of citrus canker -infected plants within the orch ard. (a) UAV 
hyperspectral imaging system and (b) regions of interest were chosen from the plants affected by citrus canker [11]. 
 
