arXiv:2404.00192v1  [cs.HC]  29 Mar 2024Tools andTasks in Sensemaking:
AVisual AccessibilityPerspective
YichunZhao
University ofVictoria
Victoria BC,Canada
yichunzhao@uvic.caMiguelA. Nacenta
University ofVictoria
Victoria BC,Canada
nacenta@uvic.ca
ABSTRACT
Our previous interview study explores the needs and uses of d ia-
grammatic information by the Blind and Low Vision (BLV) com-
munity, resulting in a framework called the Ladder of Diagram
Access. The framework outlines ﬁve levels of information access
when interacting with a diagram. In this paper, we connect th is
framework to include the global activity of sensemaking and dis-
cuss its (in)accessibility to the BLV demographic. We also d iscuss
the integration of this framework into the sensemaking proc ess
and explore the current sensemaking practices and strategi es em-
ployedbytheBLVcommunity,thechallengestheyfaceatdiﬀe rent
levels of the ladder,and potential solutionsto enhance inc lusivity
towards a data-driven workforce.
KEYWORDS
Sensemaking, Accessibility,Blind and Low-vision
ACMReference Format:
YichunZhaoandMiguelA.Nacenta.2024.ToolsandTasksinSensemaking :
A Visual Accessibility Perspective . In Sensemaking Workshop, CHIConfer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24), May 11– 16, 2024,
Honolulu,HI,USA. ACM,NewYork, NY, USA, 4pages.
1 INTRODUCTION
Sensemakingistheprocessofcreatingandreﬁningundersta nding
from complex and uncertain data and it is a crucial skill for m any
professionaldomains[ 2].However,sensemakingoftenreliesheav-
ilyonvisualrepresentations suchasdiagrams,charts,and graphs,
toconveyandmanipulateinformation[ 7].Thisposesasigniﬁcant
challengeforpeoplewithvisualdisabilities,whomayhave limited
orno access totheserepresentations.
In this paper, we explore the topic of sensemaking from a vi-
sual accessibility perspective and discuss the current pra ctice in
thisarea.Webelievediagrammaticinformationholdsauniq ueand
compelling interest rooted in the seminal work of Larkin and Si-
mon, who argued thatdiagrams can aid problem-solving and co g-
nitivetasksbyreducingsearch,supportingrecognitionov errecall,
and facilitating perceptual inference [ 3]. Diagrams, by their very
nature, present information in a spatially organized manne r that
allowsforeﬃcientprocessingandinterpretationtorepres entcom-
plex relationships and structures more intuitively than te xtual or
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of thi s work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesar enotmadeordistributed
forproﬁtorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisn oticeandthefullcitation
ontheﬁrstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsoft hisworkmustbehonored.
For all other uses,contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’24Sensemaking Workshop,May 11–16,2024,Honolulu, HI ,USA
© 2024 Copyrightheld by the owner/author(s).numericaldata,makingthemapowerfultoolforsensemaking .We
delve into the insights derived from a qualitative intervie w study
conducted by Zhao et al. [ 10,11]. The study involved 15 blind
andlow-vision(BLV)individualswhosharedtheirexperien cesand
challenges withaccessing and usingdiagrams invarious con texts.
Theseinsightsareencapsulatedinthe LadderofDiagramAccess ,a
frameworkthatcharacterizesthediﬀerentlevelsofinform ationac-
cessthatBLVpeoplecanachievewheninteractingwithadiag ram,
and thefactorsthatinﬂuence their access.
Wethen applythis framework tothe sensemaking processand
show how it can help us understand and address the accessibil ity
barriers that BLV people face when performing complex, prof es-
sional tasks that involve data analysis and visualization. We also
discuss thepotential impact of ourﬁndings onthe design of t ools
andtasksforsensemakingandtheimplicationsforcreating amore
inclusive and diverse data-driven workforce. Finally, we a cknowl-
edgethelimitationsofourstudyandsuggest directionsfor future
research.Ourcontributionisnotareiterationoftheseﬁnd ings,but
ratherareinterpretation andapplicationofthemthrought helens
ofsensemaking. Weexplorehow the LadderofDiagramAccess in-
tersects with the sensemaking process, providing a fresh pe rspec-
tiveontheoriginal study.
2 METHODS
We revisit a qualitative interview study conducted with 15 B LV
participants, all of whom had varying degrees of vision loss and
experience with diagrams. This study was originally undert aken
as part of a larger project aimed at designing and evaluating a
novel tool for making node-link diagrams accessible to BLV i ndi-
viduals [10,11]. The study followed a semi-structured interview
protocol,asking participants to describe their encounter s with di-
agrams invarious contextsand demonstratetheir preferred meth-
ods of accessing and using diagrams. The open coding and the-
matic analysis of the interview transcripts led to the emerg ence
of 124codes,which were groupedinto ﬁve themes. These theme s
collectivelyformedthe LadderofDiagramAccess framework,asig-
niﬁcant outcomeof the study. In this paper, we further delve into
the codebook, reanalyzing these insights to better align wi th the
datasensemakingprocessbyadoptingestablishedmodelsan dthe-
ories ofsensemaking.
3 RESULTS: LADDER OF DIAGRAMACCESS
Thisframeworkdescribestheﬁvelevelsofinformationacce ssthat
BLVpeoplecanachieve wheninteractingwithadiagram,andt he
factorsthatinﬂuence their access. Fromthelowest tothehi ghest:
(1)Unaware of the Representation : This bottom level corre-
spondstothesituationwhereBLVindividualsareunawareofCHI ’24 Sensemaking Workshop, May 11–16, 2024,Honolulu, HI ,USA Yichun Zhao and Miguel A.Nacenta
a diagram’s existence due to it being skipped or ignored by
their assistive technology or informants, having no access to
thedata.
(2)Aware of the Representation : BLV individuals know a dia-
gramexistsbutlackfurtherinformationaboutit.Forexamp le,
they may hear a placeholder such as “graphic” or “embedded
object” from their screen reader, but they do not know what
typeofdiagramitis,whatitrepresents,orwhyitisimporta nt.
Theyknow theexistence of thedata,butnot tothedataitself
ortheschema ofthediagram.
(3)Single Static Perspective : BLV individuals learn about the
diagramfromasinglestaticperspective(e.g.,alternativ etext),
butlack control over the level of detail and granularityof t he
information.
(4)Multiple Perspectives :BLV individuals gain additional per-
spectivesofthediagrambeyond astaticdescription,allow ing
more interactive and ﬂexible query and navigation. This sup -
portsdiﬀerenttasksandgoalsthatBLVpeoplemayhavewhen
accessing a diagram, such as ﬁnding relations, summarizing ,
orreﬂecting.
(5)Comprehensive Access : The top level corresponds to the
idealsituationwhereBLVindividualsaccessthediagramco m-
parably to sighted individuals in terms of eﬃciency and ef-
fectiveness, enablingtaskslikeunderstanding,analyzin g, and
creating new knowledge fromthedata.
3.1 Current Practices andChallenges relatedto
Sensemaking
Within the scope of the previous interview study, we have lea rnt
aboutparticipants’ current experiences with accessing an d under-
standing diagrammatic information at diﬀerent levels on th e lad-
der. At the lower levels 1 and 2, they often struggle to know th e
existenceofadiagram,tounderstanditspurposeandconten t,and
togetasinglestaticperspectiveofit.Fouroutof15partic ipantsre-
sort tousing OCR orCV toolsto scan and read diagrams tomove
up to level 3 but accuracy and reliability cannot be ensured. Six
seek information through alternative means but this takes t ime
and eﬀorts. To move up to level 4 and 5, eleven participants se ek
additionalandcomplimentaryinformationfromothersourc espro-
vidingdiﬀerence perspectives.Many(14outof15)relyonsi ghted
individuals to describe diagrams and can engage in a back-an d-
forthconversation toquerythediagram.
However, several barriers to sensemaking emerge. The succe ss
ofsensemakingdependsonindividualneeds(n=5),andastat icrep-
resentationislimitedasP12explains:“Sometimes,youjus twantto
skimsomething,andyoucan’t.Youcan’tdothe“cheaty”shor t[cut]
method of looking at the diagrams [visually]and inferring t he in-
formation.” P6 highlights that the single perspective migh t not be
enough for tasks which require more information: “I don’t ha ve
enough information [from the diagram] ... I think it makes a d if-
ference too if I actually need it for something [to perform ta sks
on],orifit’sjustkindofsomethingthat’sjustthere.”P10 alsocon-
ﬁrms that it is “a big challenge” to match the diﬀerent goals o f
individuals, such as the diagram “design”, “layout”, or “st atistical
information”.Withmultipleperspectives,therecouldbealackofconsist ency
intheinformationaccessed from them (n=4). P11explained: “The
challengeis...[to]workout[multipleaccessestoinforma tion]that
are going towork universally [so that]I, the next person, an d the
nextpersonafterwillbeabletointerpretthemallinasimil arway.”
P10 added that if there is inconsistency, then they would “[s tart
to]investtimeintryingtounderstandthat.”P8hadtosomet imes
combinemultipleperspectivesfromotherpeople:“Everybo dyhas
a diﬀerent way of explaining something, and if somebodymiss ed
some key things, then it’s important to get an explanation fr om 2
or 3 people, and then I can put things together better.” P14 hi gh-
lighted that crucial information might bemissed when trans ition-
ing between an overview of a diagram and its speciﬁc details a nd
gaveanexampleofoccasionallymissingconnectionsbetwee nindi-
vidualdiagramentities.Fiveparticipantsalsoreportedt heneedto
iterativelyassesstherelevanceofinformationcurrently presented
and switchperspectiveif necessary.
Despite these challenges to sensemaking, participants sha red
strategies to overcome them. One approach is to divide the in for-
mation into digestible parts or layers (n=3): “It’s always b est to
simplifyandbreakupthetopicintomultiplediagrams,oryo urisk
makingituseless” [P2].Fortactilediagrams,P11usediﬀer ent tex-
turestodistinguishvariouselementsandregions.Additio nally,14
people recommended to consider both the overview and the de-
tails of a diagram, as conﬁrmed by P8: “Start with a basic outl ine
andthentryﬁllinginthedetail.”Twoparticipantswouldre arrange
spatiallayoutsmentallytoenhancesensemaking:“Sometim esyou
have to come up with new ways of representing things ... so tha t
youknowthisrelatestothis,butinanalternativewayitrel atesto
that as well” [P7]. 13 participants also annotate alongside the dia-
grams.Participants atlevel 4or5canconductmoresensemak ing-
relatedtaskssuchascross-referencingandcomparing(n=1 0),ﬁnd-
ing patterns or commonalities (n=5), summarization (n=1) a nd re-
ﬂection(n=1).
4 DISCUSSION: SENSEMAKING AND VISUAL
ACCESSIBILITY
We elaborate on the implications that the challenges BLV peo ple
facewhenaccessingdiagramshaveonsensemaking. Multiple per-
spectives sometimes lead to inconsistencies and confusion , cause
peopletostrugglewithreconciling theseconﬂictingdetai ls aﬀect-
ing the audience’s understanding of the data. The Iceberg Se nse-
making model marks the importance of considering both expli cit
and tacit schemas when interpreting data [ 1], and any inconsis-
tencies betweentheseschemas can obstructthesensemaking pro-
cess. As a result, peoplemay ﬁnd themselves spending moreti me
synthesizing information from various sources, which is al sopart
of the iterative development and reﬁnement of knowledge str uc-
tures[2,6].However,welearntfromtheinterview studythatthis
costisevenmoresigniﬁcantforBLVpeople.Therefore,itis impor-
tanttostrikea balancebetweenperspectivestomanage cogn itive
load.Lastly,therelianceonsightedindividualsorothers ourcesfor
additional perspectives can also be limiting, with availab ility, ex-
pertise,andsocialdynamicsinﬂuencingthequalityandtim elinessTools and Tasks in Sensemaking:
A VisualAccessibility Perspective CHI ’24Sensemaking Workshop, May 11–16, 2024,Honolulu, HI , USA
of these perspectives. The Iceberg Sensemaking model ackno wl-
edges this complexity and highlights the role of power dynam ics
and theneed toarticulatetacitknowledge explicitly[ 1].
Theladderofaccesscanhelpusunderstandhowthesensemak-
ingloopandthedataframe[ 2]modelcanbeusedmoreeﬀectively
to transform data into knowledge and insights. The sensemak ing
processiscurtailedatthelowerlevelsintheladder,where individ-
ualsmaystruggletoknowtheexistence ofadiagram,underst and
its purposeand basic content and assess its relevance. By mo ving
up the ladder, people can leverage multiple perspectives to sup-
portandenhancetheirsensemaking process.Infact,sensem aking
tools commonly assume that users are already at level 4 and ab le
to access additional perspectives. The higher levels in the ladder
alsoemphasize theiterativenatureofsensemaking, where p eople
develop and reﬁne their mental modelsthrough activities li kefor-
agingandsynthesis[ 2,8].Multipleandinteractiveperspectivesof
informationalsoallowBLVpeopletoformalternativerepre senta-
tionswhicharepartofthelearningloopcomplex[ 8].Forexample,
a BLV projectmanager whowants tomakesense of aGantt chart
diagrammaybeatlevel2iftheyonlyknowthatthereisagraph ic
on the web page, but not what it represents. They may move to
level 3 if they can access a static description of the diagram , such
as an alt-text or an OCR output. However, this may not be suﬃ-
cient for their sensemaking needs, as they may want to explor e
the diagram in more detail, compare diﬀerent diagram elemen ts,
or test diﬀerent hypotheses. To achieve level 4, they may nee d to
accessmultipleperspectivesofthediagram,suchasasumma ry,an
overview, or a query. This may require the help of sighted peo ple
ortheuseofspecializedtoolsliketactilegraphics.Torea chlevel5,
they may need to access the diagram in an eﬃcient and eﬀective
way, without excessive cognitive or social costs, and ideal ly with
thesame beneﬁts as sighted people.
Representationslikediagramsarespatialinnatureandcan take
advantage of visual processing [ 7]. We have learnt from our BLV
participants that spatial information is crucial in making sense of
information tounderstand the“items” in a diagram, the “rel ation-
shipsofspaceandtheitemsthattakeupthespace”,andthe“s pace
in between them” [P2]. Although the visual aspect of spatial in-
formation might not be perceived successfully, one can stil l un-
derstand spatial information by relying on other sensory in puts.
Oneexamplegivenbyourparticipantswasthattheycouldide ntify
salientfeaturesofatactilediagrambydistinguishing diﬀ erenttac-
tile textures or symbols. Considering alternative represe ntations
beyond visual ones is therefore important. At the same time, we
also learnt that an representation should aﬀord interactio ns that
allowstheaudiencetoﬁlterinformationindiﬀerent layers tohelp
them construct the mental models of the information more eﬀe c-
tively.
The ladder of diagram access can be integrated into the sense -
makingprocess,asitaﬀectshowBLVpeoplegather,represen t,and
communicateinformation.Thehigherthelevelofaccess,th emore
likelyBLVpeoplecanperformsensemaking tasks,suchasﬁnd ing
patterns,generatinginsights,andcreatingsolutions.Ho wever,the
level ofaccess mayalsodepend onthesensemaking context,s uch
as the task, the domain, and the goal [ 2]. For example, a BLV per-
son who wants to make sense of a networking diagram may only
needlevel3accessiftheyareinterestedintheoveralldist ributionof the data, but they may need level 4 or 5 access if they want to
compareor drilldownintothedetails.
4.1 Towards anInclusive Data-driven
Workforce
Despite the diﬃculties, our interview study conﬁrmed that m any
BLVpeopleareeagerandcapableofparticipatinginthedata -driven
workforceandthattheyhavedevelopedavarietyofcopingst rate-
gies and workarounds to overcome accessibility barriers to sense-
making. These ﬁndings also have implications for the design of
toolsandinterventionsthatcansupportsensemakingforBL Vpeo-
ple,andcontributetoaninclusivedata-drivenworkforce. Someof
thepotentialsolutionsand strategies foraddressing thei dentiﬁed
challenges include:
UniversalDesign. Thisreferstothedesignofproducts,environ-
ments, and systems that are accessible and usable by all peop le,
regardless of their abilities, preferences, or contexts [ 4]. Univer-
saldesigncanhelpBLVpeopleachievelevel5accessbyprovi ding
multiplemodalitiestorepresentandinteractwithdiagram s.Forex-
ample,a universal designtoolcouldallowBLVuserstoswitc hbe-
tweendiﬀerent modesofpresentation,suchastext,speech, sound
or vibration, depending on their needs and preferences. Uni ver-
sal design can also beneﬁt sighted people, as it can enhance t heir
cognitive and perceptual abilities, and accommodatetheir diverse
learning styles and situations [ 5].
TranslationTools. Thesearetoolsthatcantranslateinformation
fromonerepresentation toanother,suchasfromdiagrammat icto
linear beyond the modality. Translation tools can help BLV p eo-
ple achieve level 4 or 5 access by providing multiple perspec tives
of information and allowing them to explore and manipulate d ia-
grammatic information in their preferred modality. For exa mple,
a translation tool could convert a bar chart into a series of t ones,
where thepitch, volume, and durationof each tonecorrespon dto
the height, width, and label of each bar. By providing altern ative
ways of perceiving and understanding diagrams, translatio ntools
can also potentially reveal hidden or complex patterns and r ela-
tionships.
SensemakingTools. Thesesupportthesensemakingprocess,such
as ﬁnding, framing, ﬁltering, organizing, analyzing, and c ommu-
nicating information [ 2,7–9]. Sensemaking tools can help BLV
peopleachieve level 5 access by providing features and func tions
that can reduce the cognitive and social costs of accessing d ia-
grams, and enhance the beneﬁts of generating insights and so lu-
tions. For example, a sensemaking tool could provide a summa ry,
an overview, or a query of the diagram, as well as note-taking ,
hypothesis-testing,oracollaborationfunction.Sensema kingtools
caninvolvedesignprinciplesfromuniversaldesignandtra nslation
tools to ultimately facilitate information processing and decision-
making.
5 LIMITATIONS AND FUTUREDIRECTIONS
Whileourstudyprovidesvaluableinsightsintothechallen gesand
strategies of BLV people when accessing and using diagrams, it
alsohasseverallimitations.Ourstudyfocusedononetypeo frepre-
sentationofinformationbeingdiagrammatic,soourﬁnding s mayCHI ’24 Sensemaking Workshop, May 11–16, 2024,Honolulu, HI ,USA Yichun Zhao and Miguel A.Nacenta
notapplytoothertypesofrepresentations. Infutureresea rch, we
plan to conduct more in-depth studies to investigate the spe ciﬁc
challenges and strategies of BLV people when performing sen se-
making tasks in a professional setting and also in a collabor ative
setting.Webelieveourworkcancontributetotheongoingeﬀ orts
toempowerallpeopletoparticipatefullyinthedata-drive nwork-
force.
REFERENCES
[1] Charles Berret and Tamara Munzner. 2023. Iceberg Sensem aking: A Process
ModelforCriticalDataAnalysisandVisualization.arXiv: 2204.04758(Aug.2023).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04758 arXiv:2204.04758[cs].
[2] Sheriﬀ Jolaoso, Russ Burtner, and Alex Endert. 2015. Toward a Deeper Un-
derstanding of Data Analysis, Sensemaking, and Signature D iscovery. Lecture
NotesinComputerScience,Vol.9297. SpringerInternation al Publishing,Cham,
463–478. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22668-2_36
[3] Jill H. Larkin and Herbert A. Simon. 1987. Why a Diagram is (Some-
times) Worth Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive Science 11, 1 (1987), 65–100.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6708.1987.tb00863.x
[4] Inger Marie Lid. 2014. Universal Design and disability: an interdisciplinary
perspective. Disability and Rehabilitation 36, 16 (Aug. 2014), 1344–1349.https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2014.931472
[5] Richard E. Mayer.2002. Multimedia learning . Vol. 41. Academic Press, 85–139.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(02)80005-6
[6] Peter Pirolliand Stuart Card.2005. The sensemakingprocessand leverage points
for analyst technology as identiﬁed throughcognitivetask analysis.
[7] DanielM.Russell.2003. Learningtosee,seeingtolearn :visualaspectsofsense-
making, Bernice E. Rogowitz and Thrasyvoulos N. Pappas (Eds .). Santa Clara,
CA, 8.https://doi.org/10.1117/12.501132
[8] Daniel M. Russell, Mark J. Steﬁk, Peter Pirolli, and Stua rt K. Card. 1993.
The cost structure of sensemaking. In Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93
and CHI ’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’93). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 26 9–276.
https://doi.org/10.1145/169059.169209
[9] Karl E. Weick, Kathleen M. Sutcliﬀe, and DavidObstfeld. 2005. Organizingand
the Process of Sensemaking. Organization Science 16, 4 (Aug. 2005), 409–421.
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1050.0133
[10] Yichun Zhao. 2023. Designing TADA: Touch-and-Audio-based
Diagram Access for People with Visual Impairments . Thesis.
https://dspace.library.uvic.ca/handle/1828/15291 Accepted: 2023-08-
25T22:58:09Z.
[11] Yichun Zhao, Miguel A Nacenta, Mahadeo A Sukhai, and Sow mya Somanath.
2024. TADA: Making Node-link Diagrams Accessible to Blind a nd Low-Vision
People. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computi ng
Systems(CHI’24),May11–16,2024,Honolulu,HI,USA .ACM,Honolulu,HI,USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642222This figure "acm-jdslogo.png" is available in "png"
 format from:
http://arxiv.org/ps/2404.00192v1