arXiv:2404.01130v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  1 Apr 2024Thermodynamic dissipation does not bound replicator growt h and decay rates
Artemy Kolchinsky∗
ICREA-Complex Systems Lab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 0800 3 Barcelona, Spain and
Universal Biology Institute, The University of Tokyo, 7-3- 1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
In a well-known paper, Jeremy England derived a bound on the f ree energy dissipated by a self-replicating
system [England, “Statistical physics of self-replicatio n”,The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2013]. This bound is
usually interpreted as a universal relationship that links thermodynamic dissipation to the replicator’s per-capita
decay and growth rates. Contrary to this interpretation, we argue from thermodynamic principles that such a
relationship cannot exist. In particular, we show that it is impossible for a system to undergo both replication
and per-capita decay back into reactants. While it is possib le for a system to undergo replication and decay into
separate waste products, in that case replication and decay are two independent physical processes, and there is
no universal relationship between their thermodynamic and dynamical properties.
I. INTRODUCTION
Research in thermodynamics has shown that there are uni-
versal relationships between the thermodynamic and dynami c
properties of nonequilibrium processes. The most famous re -
lationship, termed local detailed balance (LDB), says that the
temporal irreversibility of a stochastic physical process is re-
lated to the amount of entropy produced in the system and the
environment during that process [2]. The generality of LDB
suggests that it may imply universal bounds on the thermody-
namic properties of living systems.
This idea inspired a 2013 paper by England on the thermody-
namics of self-replicating systems [1]. In this paper, Engl and
considered a population of replicators that evolves accord ing
to a stochastic master equation [Eq. (9) in Ref. [1]],
˙pn(t)≈ng(pn−1(t)−pn(t))−δn(pn(t)−pn+1(t)),(1)
wherepn(t)is the probability of nreplicators, gis the per-
capita replication rate, and δis the per-capita decay rate, de-
ﬁned as the “reversion of the replicator back into the exact s et
of reactants in its environment out of which it was made”. For
large population sizes, ﬂuctuations can be neglected and n(t),
the population at time t, will grow exponentially as
n(t)≈n(0)e(g−δ)t. (2)
This shows how the per-capita replication and decay rates in the
master equation are related to long-term population dynami cs.
We will refer to replication and decay with per-capita rates g
andδasﬁrst-order replication andﬁrst-order decay .
The main result of England’s paper is a thermodynamic
bound on the ratio of growth and decay rates [Eq. (10) in
Ref. [1]],
∆stot≥lng
δ, (3)
where∆stotis the entropy production incurred when a sin-
gle replicator makes a copy of itself. As we explain below,
the quantity ∆stotis proportional to the free energy dissipated
∗artemyk@gmail.comduring replication. England illustrates the bound using tw o
real-world systems of interest: an RNA-based molecular rep li-
cator constructed by Lincoln and Joyce [3] and an E. coli
bacterium.
The bound (3) appears to bridge two diﬀerent worlds: the
physical world of thermodynamic dissipation and the biolog -
ical world of replicator dynamics. From an intellectual per -
spective, we ﬁnd England’s proposal stimulating and elegan t.
However, by studying the thermodynamics of simple molec-
ular replicators [4], we have come to ﬁnd that the bound (3)
must be interpreted with great care.
In this paper, we argue that, contrary to standard interpret a-
tions of this result, inequality (3) does not provide a therm o-
dynamic bound on the growth and decay rates of replicators.
In fact, we argue that there cannot be a bound of this type. We
begin by proving a general “impossibility theorem” that sho ws
that it is thermodynamically infeasible for a ﬁrst-order re plica-
tor to undergo ﬁrst-order decay back into reactants. Instea d, a
replicator can decay either by undergoing the reverse proce ss
of autocatalysis, in which case decay is not ﬁrst-order, or b y
decaying into a diﬀerent set of waste products, in which case
there cannot be a universal relationship between propertie s of
the two independent processes of replication and decay.
Nonetheless, we emphasize that the bound (3) is valid as
long as∆stot,gandδare appropriately interpreted. Speciﬁ-
cally, the bound applies to the forward and reverse transiti ons
between two ﬁxed macrostates of an arbitrary physical syste m,
which may or may not be a replicator. However, as we show
below, considering transitions between two ﬁxed macrostat es
is not enough to capture the kinetics and thermodynamics of
replication.
II. BACKGROUND
We begin with a high-level summary of the derivation of
England’s bound (3). For details, we refer the reader to Ref. [1].
England considers an undriven system coupled to a heat
bath at temperature T. The system is associated with two
arbitrary macrostates IandII, i.e., two subsets of microstates.
Macrostate Iis associated with a probability distribution over
microstates, pI(i), whose support is restricted to I. Macrostate
IIis also associated with a probability distribution pII(i)with2
support restricted to II, deﬁned by propagatingthe distribution
pIunder the microscopic stochastic dynamics over time dtand
then conditioning on membership in macrostate II.
The entropy produced when going from macrostate Ito
macrostate IIis
∆stot(I→II) =/angbracketleftQ/angbracketright/kBT+∆sint. (4)
Here,/angbracketleftQ/angbracketrightis the expected amount of heat released to the bath
during the transition I→II,kBis Boltzmann constant, and
∆sint=S(pII)−S(pI)
is the increase of the internal Shannon entropy in going from
macrostate ItoII. We may also write the entropy production
in terms of the dissipated free energy,
∆stot(I→II) = (FI−FII)/kBT, (5)
whereFI=/angbracketleftE/angbracketrightpI−kBT S(pI)is the free energy of
macrostate Igiven energy function E, and similarly for FII.
Eqs. (4) and (5) are equivalent since /angbracketleftQ/angbracketright=/angbracketleftE/angbracketrightpI−/angbracketleftE/angbracketrightpIIby
the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics.
To derive a bound on the entropy production, England cal-
culates the (conditional) transition probability π(I→II)that
the ﬁnal microstate belongs to macrostate II, given that the
initial microstate is drawn from pI. He also calculates the
transition probability π(II→I)that the ﬁnal microstate be-
longs to macrostate I, given that the initial microstate is drawn
frompII. England shows that the entropy production involved
in going from ItoIIis bounded by the log ratio of these two
transition probabilities,
∆stot(I→II)≥lnπ(I→II)
π(II→I). (6)
This result is derived by assuming overdamped dynamics and
invoking the principle of LDB, along with some mathematical
manipulation. It is a useful and general inequality that app lies
to many types of physical processes.
To make the connection to self-replication, England deﬁnes
macrostate Ias the set of microstates that contain a single
replicator, plus reactants needed for successful replicat ion.
Macrostate IIis deﬁned as the set of microstates that contain
two replicators: the parent replicator found in microstate I
and its new oﬀspring. We emphasize that although the overall
system is undriven,macrostate Imay nonetheless contain high-
energy reactants that drive the replication transition I→II
forward. The transition probability π(I→II)of replication
is approximated using a ﬁrst-order replication rate gasπ(I→
II)≈gdt. The transition probability π(II→I), which
corresponds to the reversion of the oﬀspring replicator bac k
into “the exact set of reactants in its environment out of whi ch
it was made”, is approximated using a ﬁrst-order decay rate δ
asπ(II→I)≈δdt(see also [5]).
III. IMPOSSIBILITY THEOREM
We now point out an issue with the above analysis which
arises from the fact that it is not possible for a system toundergo both ﬁrst-order replication and ﬁrst-order decay b ack
into reactants.
To introduce our argument, we consider another macrostate
0whose microstates do not contain any replicator but only
the reactants needed for replication. The transition proba bility
π(I→0)refers to the reversion of the single replicator in I
back into reactants, while the transition probability π(0→I)
refers to the spontaneous (uncatalyzed) formation of repli -
cator from reactants. Applying the inequality (6) to these
macrostates yields a bound on the entropy produced during
the transition I→0:
∆stot(I→0) = (FI−F0)/kBT≥lnπ(I→0)
π(0→I),(7)
whereF0is the free energy of macrostate 0.
At the same time, the deﬁning property of self-replication i s
autocatalysis , meaning that the formation of a new replicator
in the presence of an existing replicator should be much fast er
than spontaneous formation directly from reactants. Thus, we
may say that a system is self-replicating only if
π(0→I)≪π(I→II). (8)
If this condition did not hold, we should not interpret the
transition I→IIas “replication”, since the new oﬀspring can
arise due to spontaneous formation from reactants. Also, we
could not describe replication with a ﬁrst-order rate const ant
gas in the master equation (1), since the growth term would
not be linear in population size.
Suppose that each replicator undergoes ﬁrst-order decay
with rate δ, as in the master equation (1). Then, the tran-
sition probability of ending in macrostate 0after starting in
macrostate Ishould be approximately δdt, the same as the
transition probability of ending in Iafter starting in II:
π(I→0)≈δdt≈π(II→I). (9)
Observe also that FI−F0, the decrease of free energy when
a replicator undergoes reversion back into reactants, shou ld be
the opposite of FI− FII, the decrease of free energy when
reactants are converted into a new replicator during a repli -
cation event. This implies that the entropy production for t he
two transitions should be related as
∆stot(I→0)≈ −∆stot(I→II) (10)
Plugging (9) and (10) into (7) gives
∆stot(I→II)≤lnπ(0→I)
π(II→I).
This can be combined with (6) and simpliﬁed to give
π(0→I)≥π(I→II). (11)
However, we have arrived at a contradiction with the necessa ry
condition for self-replication (8).
The idea behind this argument can also be illustrated using a
simple but concrete model. Consider an autocatalytic chemi cal
reaction such as
X+Aκ1⇋
κ−
12X, (12)3
whereXis a replicator molecule and Ais a substrate reactant.
For simplicity, we assume that the reaction is elementary wi th
mass-action kinetics, and that the molecular counts are suﬃ -
ciently large such that the system can be described in terms o f
deterministic number concentrations, n= [X]anda= [A].
Reaction (12) exhibits forward ﬂux κ1nawith forward rate
constantκ1, and reverse ﬂux κ−
1n2with backward rate con-
stantκ−
1. We note that the reverse ﬂux is second-order in
n. For convenience, we will sometimes use the term uncopy-
ingto refer to the reverse direction of autocatalysis, that is
the catalyzed reversion of the replicator back into substra te
(2X→X+A).
Suppose that Xcan also decay back into reactant in an
uncatalyzed fashion,
Xκ2⇋
κ−
2A. (13)
This decay reaction will have forward ﬂux κ2nand reverse
ﬂuxκ−
2a. The two reactions (12) and (13) have opposite
stoichiometry and therefore opposite free energy of reacti on
−∆G. The principle of LDB states that −∆G(in units of J
per reaction) can be expressed as the log ratio of forward and
backward ﬂuxes [6],
−∆G/kBT= lnκ1na
κ−
1n2= lnκ−
2a
κ2n. (14)
Now, in order for the system to exhibit ﬁrst-order replicati on
rather than uncatalyzed formation, it must be that κ1na≫
κ−
2a, such that the creation of replicators is dominated by
autocatalysis, not the reverse of the decay reaction. In ord er
for the system to undergo ﬁrst-order decay, rather than seco nd-
order uncopying, it must be that κ2n≫κ−
1n2. It can be seen
that these two inequalities are incompatible with Eq. (14),
highlighting the thermodynamic inconsistency.
In essence, replication ( X+A→2X) is thermodynam-
ically favored over uncopying ( 2X→X+A) to the same
extent that uncatalyzed formation ( A→X) is favored over
ﬁrst-order decay ( X→A). Thus, if ﬁrst-order decay is the
dominant pathway for destruction, uncatalyzed formationm ust
be the dominant pathway for formation.
Of course, if the ﬁrst-order decay reaction (13) occurs at
negligible rates, then the system would exhibit ﬁrst-order repli-
cation via the forward direction of (12). In addition, decay
back into reactants would occur due to uncopying, the revers e
direction of the catalyzed reaction (12). In terms of the tra n-
sition probabilities between macrostates, π(II→I)would be
non-zero due to uncopying, while π(I→0)would be negli-
gible since decay would only occur if two or more replicators
are present. Equality would no longer hold in (9), thereby
avoiding the undesirable conclusion that replicators must form
spontaneously from reactants.
However, in the case of uncopying (catalyzed decay), the
decay rate of any particular replicator will depend on how ma ny
other replicators it encounters, and so decay cannot be ﬁrst -
order (e.g., the elementary autocatalytic reaction (12) le ads to
second-order decay, κ−
1n2). This kind of decay is inconsistent
with the master equation (1), which has the ﬁrst-order termδn, as well as the exponential growth equation (2), which only
holds for ﬁrst-order replication and ﬁrst-order decay.
To summarize, a thermodynamically consistent replicator
cannot simultaneously exhibit ﬁrst-order replication and ﬁrst-
order decay back into reactants. Of course, many replicator s
do exhibit both ﬁrst-order replication and ﬁrst-order deca y. As
we discuss in the next section, they do so by decaying into
diﬀerent waste products, not reverting back into their orig inal
reactants.
IV. ALTERNATIVE DEGRADATION PATHWAYS
Until now, we followed England in assuming that the de-
cay transition II→Iinvolves “reversion of the replicator
back into the exact set of reactants in its environment out of
which it was made”. However, in most replicators of interest ,
the decay process that is actually observed is not reversion
back into reactants, but rather degradation into diﬀerent w aste
products. Such a system can exhibit both ﬁrst-order replica tion
and decay. However, as we argue here, if there is no general
relationship between the processes of replication and deca y,
then there cannot be a universal relationship between therm o-
dynamics of replication and decay rates. We note that some
related issues were raised in an insightful paper by Saakian
and Qian [7].
As a concrete example, consider again the autocatalytic
replicator discussed in the previous section. Imagine that
the dominant decay process is neither uncatalyzed reversio n
back to reactants, as in reaction (13), nor uncopying, as in
the reverse of reaction (12). Rather, decay involves a separ ate
reaction
Xκ3⇋
κ−
3W, (15)
whereWis a waste product diﬀerent from the substrate reac-
tantA. Let us consider the RNA replicator [3][8] discussed
in England’s paper [1]. In this system, the replication reac -
tion consumes a reactant RNA molecule with a triphosphate
group and releases an inorganic pyrophosphate as a side prod -
uct. Decay can proceed in one of two ways. The ﬁrst is
the reverse of replication, known as pyrophosphorolysis in
the literature [9–11], in which a pyrophosphate is consumed
and a triphosphate-charged RNA molecule is produced. The
second is spontaneous hydrolysis of the RNA phosphodiester
bond. Hydrolysis is a separate reaction that does not involv e
pyrophosphate and it produces a “waste” RNA molecule, with
the triphosphate group replaced by a monophosphate group.
We use the term degradation to refer to the decay of the
replicator into diﬀerent waste products, as opposed to reve r-
sion into the initial reactants. Because replication and de gra-
dation are independent processes, not reverse directions o f
the same process, in general they have independent thermody -
namic properties. For this reason, Eq. (10) does not apply, a nd
both replication and degradation may be thermodynamically
favored in the forward direction, allowing simultaneous ﬁr st-
order replication and ﬁrst-order degradation. For instanc e,
for an autocatalytic replicator with reactions (12) and (15 ),4
the per-capita replication rate may be taken as g=κ1a(over
timescales where the reactant concentration ais approximately
constant) and the per-capita degradation rate may be taken a s
δ=κ3.
Notably, when considering actual examples [1], England
calculates the decay rate as the rate of degradation into was te
products, rather than the rate of reversion back into reacta nts.
For example, for the RNA replicator, it is estimated as the ra te
of RNA hydrolysis, not pyrophosphorolysis. For the E. coli, it
is estimated in terms of the time required for all peptide bon ds
in a single cell to undergo hydrolysis. This diﬀers from the
rate of reversion back into reactants, which would involve t he
reverse reaction of protein bond formation, de-respiratio n of
released carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen, etc.
In the original LDB-type bound (6), the reverse transition
probability π(II→I)refers to reversion back into original
reactants, not degradation into other waste products. In or der
to connect this bound to degradation, England assumes that
reversion is slower than degradation, so
π(II→I)≤δ′dt. (16)
whereδ′is the degradation rate. The result (3) then follows
from (6), with δtaken to be the degradation rate δ′. However,
there are some problems with this approach.
For one, there is no a priori reason that reversion must be
slower than degradation. For example, for the RNA replicato r,
England assumes that hydrolysis (degradation) is faster th an
pyrophosphorolysis (reversion), but this is questionable since
there is no universal relationship between these the rates o f two
processes. Moreover, the rate of pyrophosphorolysis depen ds
on the concentration of pyrophosphate [9–11], while that of
hydrolysis does not. At increased pyrophosphate concentra -
tions, pyrophosphorolysis can proceed as fast as a minute pe r
nucleotide, at least in the context of the bacterial polymer ase
system where it has been studied [10]. This can be order of
magnitude faster than hydrolysis, which is on the order of 4
years per nucleotide [1].
Even for the E. coli bacterium, it seems debatable whether
degradation is always faster than reversion of an oﬀspring c ell
into starting reactants. There are various scenarios that c an be
imagined that accelerate reversion, for instance the paren t cell
might run its Krebs cycle in reverse. Of course, reversion is
a hyper-astronomically unlikely, but one may ask whether it is
necessarily more unlikely than hydrolysis of all peptide bo nds,
whose probability England estimates at e−6.7×1010per 20
minute generation time (in decimal notation, this number ha s
billions of zeros after the decimal point) [1]. Common-sens e
intuitions about the relative likelihood of such astronomi cally-
unlikely events should be treated with caution.
The best way to demonstrate that degradation is faster than
reversion is to observe how a replicator actually decays. In
many cases, degradation will be the dominant decay process
and (16) is mathematically valid. However, even in such case s,
there is no meaningful thermodynamic relationship between
dissipation and growth and degradation rates, because the t wo
sides of (16) refer to two independent physical processes an d
their diﬀerence is completely uncontrolled. Consider agai n
theE. coli . Bacteria are never observed to undergo hydrolysisof all peptide bonds, but are instead observed to die at the ra te
of≈5×10−4per generation [12]. This death rate can be
related to England’s estimate of the entropy produced durin g
replication, ∆stot(I→II)≈3.3×1011[1]. Plugging these
numbers into (3) gives
∆stot(I→II) = 3.3×1011≥7.6≈ −ln(5×10−4).(17)
This inequality is not biologically or physically meaningf ul
because the two sides diﬀer by a factor of about 50 billion.
To put things in perspective, the inequality predicts that n o
less than 7.6kBTof free energy must be dissipated in order
to replicate a bacterium. This is a tiny amount, less than
the dissipation produced by the hydrolysis of a single ATP
molecule ( ≈20kBT).
Above, we argued that the inequality (16) between the prob-
ability of reversion π(II→I)and degradation δ′dtmay be
violated, or it may hold but be so weak that it is irrelevant.
One may wonder if the transition probability π(II→I)may
be deﬁned to also account for degradation, such that (16) ap-
proaches equality. In fact, whether π(II→I)does or does
not account for degradation depends in a subtle way on the
deﬁnition of macrostates IandII. Consider a replicator that
undergoes degradation into waste species W, and imagine two
diﬀerent ways of deﬁning these macrostates. Under the ﬁrst
deﬁnition, the microstates in IandIIall contain the same ﬁxed
number of waste molecules. Since degradation increases the
number of waste molecules, the transition II→Iwill not in-
clude degradation and, as assumed by England, the transitio n
probability π(II→I)will only account for reversion back
to reactants. Under the second, and arguably more realistic ,
deﬁnition, the precise number of waste molecules ﬂuctuates
among diﬀerent microstates in Iand/orII. Then, the transi-
tion probability π(II→I)will account for both reversion and
degradation.
Now suppose that degradation is many orders of magnitude
more likely than reversion,as in the E. coli that undergoes death
at the rate of δ′= 5×10−4per generation. Under the ﬁrst
deﬁnition of the macrostates, π(II→I)will be tiny compared
toδ′dt, so the inequalities (16) and (17) will be incredibly
weak. This is the case considered above. Under the second
deﬁnition of the macrostates, π(II→I)will be much larger,
and the inequality (16) may be nearly tight. However, the
entropy production ∆stot(I→II)and transition probability
π(I→II)associated with replication do not depend much
on whether the waste products are allowed to ﬂuctuate or not,
since they are not involved in replication. Therefore, to th e
extent that π(II→I)becomes much larger and (16) tighter,
LDB-type bound (6) must become much looser. At the end of
the day, we end up with the same very weak thermodynamic
bound (17). Thus, our general conclusions are not aﬀected by
the particular way that macrostates are deﬁned.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we considered England’s proposed bound on
the thermodynamics of replication, ∆stot≥ln(g/δ). As we
showed, this bound has physical meaning if the decay rate δ5
refers to the reverse of replication, in which the oﬀspring r epli-
cator reverts back to its original reactants due to interact ions
with the parent replicator. However, this reverse process c an-
not be ﬁrst-order, hence δcannot be interpreted as a per-capita
decay rate. In fact, in general, a thermodynamically consis -
tent replicator cannot exhibit both ﬁrst-order replicatio n and
ﬁrst-order replication back to reactants.
Alternatively, the decay rate may be deﬁned in terms of
the per-capita rate of degradation into waste products δ′. In
this case, however, there is no universal physical relation ship
between the degradation rate δ′and properties of replication,such asgand∆stot(I→II). Therefore, the resulting bound
(3) is not physically meaningful and can be violated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Jeremy Owen and Jordi Piñero for useful discussions.
This project has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 101068029.
[1] J. L. England, “Statistical physics of self-replicatio n,”The Jour-
nal of chemical physics , vol. 139, no. 12, p. 121923, 2013.
[2] C. Maes, “Local detailed balance,” SciPost Physics Lecture
Notes , p. 032, 2021.
[3] T. A. Lincoln and G. F. Joyce, “Self-sustained replicati on of
an RNA enzyme,” Science , vol. 323, no. 5918, pp. 1229–1232,
2009.
[4] A. Kolchinsky, “Thermodynamics of Darwinian evolution in
molecular replicators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.02809 , 2024.
[5] In England’s analysis, π(II→I)≈δdtbecause the transition
II→Iaccounts only for the decay of the new oﬀspring, not
the parent. It seems, however, that this does not necessaril y have
to be the case: if the microstates in IIdo not distinguish parent
from newborn oﬀspring, then π(II→I)should account for the
decay of either replicator, giving π(II→I)≈2δdt. However,
this minor diﬀerence in the calculation of π(II→I)is not
important for our analysis.
[6] D. Kondepudi and I. Prigogine, Modern Thermodynamics:
From Heat Engines to Dissipative Structures , 2nd ed., 2015.
[7] D. B. Saakian and H. Qian, “Nonlinear Stochastic Dynamic s
of Complex Systems, III: Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics of
Self-Replication Kinetics,” IEEE Transactions on Molecular,
Biological and Multi-Scale Communications , vol. 2, no. 1, pp.
40–51, 2016, publisher: IEEE.
[8] The RNA replicator studied by Lincoln and Joyce [3] is som e-
what more complex than elementary reaction (12). It involve s
two substrate species (corresponding to two parts of the tem -
plate), involves several elementary steps, and produces an ad-
ditional pyrophosphate side product. These details do not a ﬀect
our main point, which is that degradation by RNA hydrolysis
is not the reverse of replication, involving diﬀerent chemi cal
species and independent thermodynamic properties.
[9] U. Maitra and J. Hurwitz, “The role of deoxyribonucleic a cid
in ribonucleic acid synthesis: XIII. Modiﬁed puriﬁcation p ro-
cedure and additional properties of ribonucleic acid polym erase
from Escherichia coli w,”Journal of Biological Chemistry , vol.
242, no. 21, pp. 4897–4907, Nov. 1967.
[10] T. Rozovskaya, A. Chenchik, and R. S. Beabealashvilli, “Pro-
cessive pyrophosphorolysis of RNA by Escherichia coli RNA
polymerase,” FEBS letters , vol. 137, no. 1, pp. 100–104, 1982.
[11] J. D. Kahn and J. E. Hearst, “Reversibility of nucleotid e incor-
poration by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase, and its eﬀect
on ﬁdelity,” Journal of molecular biology , vol. 205, no. 2, pp.
291–314, 1989.
[12] P. Wang, L. Robert, J. Pelletier, W. L. Dang, F. Taddei,
A. Wright, and S. Jun, “Robust growth of Escherichia coli ,”
Current biology , vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1099–1103, 2010.